ANNEX 1
Goods for military and technological reinforcement or for the development of the defence 
and security sector
The general notes, acronyms and abbreviations as well as the definitions of the annexes to the 
Ordinance on the Control of Goods (OBDI; SR 946.202.1) are applicable to this annex. Non-
covered goods that contain one or more of the components listed in this annex are not subject to 
control (see also Art. 3 para. 3 OBDI).
The definitions of terms used in Schedule 3 of the OBDI apply to this Annex.
Part A
Category I - Electronic Materials
X.A.I.01 Electronic devices and components.
a. "Microprocessor microcircuits", "microcomputer microcircuits" 
and microcontroller microcircuits having one of the following 
characteristics:
1. execution speed equal to or greater than 5 gigaFLOPS and 
arithmetic logic unit with access width equal to or greater than 
32 bits;
2. clock frequency higher than 25 MHz; or
3. more than one data or instruction bus or serial communications 
port intended for direct external interconnection between parallel 
'microprocessor microcircuits' with a transfer rate of 2.5
Mbyte/s;
b. integrated circuit memories, as follows:
1. Electrically Erasable Programmable Read-Only Memories 
(EEPROMs) with memory capacity:
a. greater than 16 Mbit per package for flash memory 
types; or
b. higher than one of the following limits for all other 
types of EEPROM:
1. greater than 1 Mbit per package; or
2. greater than 256 kbit per package and with a 
maximum access time of less than 80 ns;
2. Static Random Access Memories (SRAMs) with memory 
capacity:
a. greater than 1 Mbit per package; or
b. greater than 256 kbit per package and with a maximum 
access time of less than 25 ns;
c. analogue-to-digital converters, having one of 
the following characteristics:
1. resolution of 8 bits or more, but less than 12 bits, with an output 
speed of more than 200 MSPS (mega samples per second);
2. 12-bit resolution with an output speed above 105 MSPS;
3. resolution greater than 12 bit but equal to or less than 14 bit with 
an output speed greater than 10 MSPS; or
4. resolution greater than 14 bits with an output speed greater 
than 2.5 MSPS;
d. user-programmable logic devices with a maximum number of numeric 
inputs/outputs between 200 and 700;
e. Fast Fourier transform (FFT) processors with a nominal execution time 
for an FFT of 1,024 complex points of less than 1 ms;
f. integrated circuits manufactured at the customer's request, for which 
neither the function nor the exportability condition of the equipment in 
which such integrated circuits will be used is known by the 
manufacturer, having one of the following characteristics
1. over 144 output terminals; or
2. typical basic propagation delay of less than 0.4 ns;
g. "Vacuum electronic devices" with progressive, pulsed or continuous 
waves, as follows:
1. coupled cavity devices or their derivatives;
2. devices based on helix, bent waveguide or serpentine circuits 
or their derivatives, having one of the following characteristics
a. "instantaneous bandwidth" equal to or greater than half an 
octave and product of the average power (expressed in 
kW) times the frequency (expressed in GHz) greater than 
0.2; or
b. "instantaneous bandwidth" less than half an octave 
and product of the average power (expressed in 
kW) times the frequency (expressed in GHz) 
greater than 0.4;
h. flexible waveguides designed for use at frequencies above 40 GHz;
i. devices using surface acoustic waves and shallow (shallow) acoustic 
waves, having one of the following characteristics:
1. carrier frequency greater than 1 GHz; or
2. carrier frequency of 1 GHz or less; and
a. frequency side-lobe rejection' greater than 55 dB;
b. product of maximum delay times bandwidth (time in μs 
and bandwidth expressed in MHz) greater than 100; or
c. dispersion delay greater than 10 μs;
Technical note: For the purposes of X.A.I.001.i, 'frequency side-
lobe rejection' means the maximum rejection value specified in 
the data sheet.
j. cells' as follows:
1. 'Primary cells' having an 'energy density' of 550 Wh/kg or less at a 
temperature of 293 K (20 °C);
2. secondary cells' having an 'energy density' of 350 Wh/kg or less 
at a temperature of 293 K (20 °C);
Note: X.A.I.001.j does not subject batteries, including single-cell batteries, 
to authorisation.
Technical notes:
1. For the purpose of X.A.I.001.j, the energy density (Wh/kg) is 
calculated by multiplying the rated voltage by the rated capacity 
expressed in ampere-hours (Ah) and dividing the product 
obtained by the mass expressed in kilograms. If the rated 
capacity is not defined, the energy density is calculated by 
multiplying the square of the rated voltage by the duration of 
discharge, expressed in hours, and dividing the product obtained 
by the discharge load expressed in ohms and the mass expressed 
in kilograms.
2. For the purposes of X.A.I.001.j., 'cell' means an 
electrochemical device that is equipped with positive and 
negative electrodes and an electrolyte and constitutes a 
source of electrical energy. It is the main constituent element 
of a battery.
3. For the purposes of X.A.I.001.j.1, a 'primary cell' is defined as a 
'cell' that is not designed to be loaded from another source.
4. For the purposes of X.A.I.001.j.2, 'secondary cell' means a 
'cell' designed to be charged by an external electrical source.
k. Superconducting' electromagnets and solenoids, specially designed for a 
complete charge or discharge time of less than one minute, having all of 
the following characteristics
Note: X.A.I.001.k does not subject 'superconducting' electromagnets or 
solenoids designed for magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) medical 
equipment to authorisation.
1. maximum energy delivered during discharge divided by the 
duration of the discharge exceeding 500 kJ per minute;
2. internal diameter of current-carrying windings greater than 250 
mm; and
3. provided for a magnetic induction of more than 8 T or an 
'overall current density' in the winding of more than 300 
A/mm ;2
l. Circuits or systems for storing electromagnetic energy, containing 
components manufactured from 'superconductive' materials specially 
designed to operate at temperatures below the 'critical temperature' of at 
least one of the 'superconductive' constituents, having all of the following 
characteristics
1. operating resonance frequencies above 1 MHz;
2. stored energy density equal to or greater than 1 MJ/m 3 ; and
3. discharge time of less than 1 ms;
m. hydrogen/hydrogen isotope thyrons made of metal-ceramic and having a 
peak current rating of 500 A or more;
n. ceramic frequency filters;
o. solar cells, interconnected glassclad assemblies (CICs), solar panels 
and arrays 'qualified for space use' and not subject to authorisation 
in
3A001.e.4(1);
p. trimmer cermet.
X.A.I.02 "Electronic assemblies", modules or equipment for general use.
a. Electronic test equipment, other than those specified in the annexes of 
the OBDI;
b. digital data recorders for magnetic tape instrumentation having one of the 
following characteristics:
1. maximum digital interface transfer rate of more than 60 Mbit/s 
and using helical scanning techniques;
2. maximum digital interface transfer rate exceeding 120 Mbit/s and 
using fixed head techniques; or
3. 'qualified for space employment';
c. equipment with a maximum digital interface transfer rate of more than 
60 Mbit/s, designed to convert digital magnetic tape recorders into 
digital instrumentation data recorders;
d. non-modular analogue oscilloscopes with a bandwidth of 1 GHz 
or more;
e. Modular analogue oscilloscope systems having one of the following 
characteristics:
1. bandwidth of the complex equal to or greater than 1 GHz; 
or
2. insertable modules with an individual bandwidth of 4 GHz 
or more;
1 See annexes to the OBDI.
f. analogue sampling oscilloscopes for analysing recurring phenomena 
with effective bandwidths above 4 GHz;
g. Digital oscilloscopes and transient recorders, employing analogue-to-
digital conversion techniques, capable of storing transients by 
sequential sampling of single-shot inputs at successive intervals of less 
than 1 ns (more than 1 giga samples per second, GSPS), with 
conversion resolution of 8 bits or more and storage capacity of 256 
samples or more.
Note: X.A.I.002 subjects the following components specially designed for 
analogue oscilloscopes to authorisation:
1.insertable units;
2.external amplifiers;
3.preamplifiers;
4.sampling devices; 5.cathode ray tubes.
X.A.I.03 Specific processing equipment, other than that specified in the Common 
Military List or the Annexes to the OBDI, as follows
a. Frequency inverters and specially designed components other than 
those specified in the annexes of the OBDI;
b. mass spectrometers, other than those specified in the annexes of the OBDI;
c. flash discharge X-ray machines or components of pulsed energy 
systems designed from such machines, including Marx generators, 
high power pulse forming networks, capacitors and high voltage 
triggers;
d. pulse amplifiers, other than those specified in the annexes of 
the OBDI;
e. electronic equipment for delay generation or interval measurement, as 
follows:
1. numerical delay generators with a resolution of 50 ns or less for 
time intervals of 1 μs or more; or
2. multi-channel (with at least 3 channels) or modular time interval 
counters and timing equipment with a resolution of 50 ns or less 
for time intervals of 1 μs or more;
f. analytical chromatographic and spectrometric instruments.
X.B.I.01 Equipment for the manufacture of electronic components or materials, as 
follows, and specially designed components and accessories thereof.
a. Equipment specially designed for the manufacture of electronic 
tubes, optical elements and specially designed components 
therefor controlled by 3A001(2) or X.A.I.001;
b. equipment specially designed for the manufacture of semiconductor 
devices, integrated circuits and 'electronic assemblies', as follows, and 
systems incorporating or having the characteristics of such equipment:
Note: X.B.I.001.b also subjects to authorisation equipment used or 
modified for use in the manufacture of other devices, such as imaging 
devices, electro-optical devices and devices using acoustic waves.
1. Equipment for the processing of materials for the manufacture of 
devices and components specified in X.B.I.001.b, as follows
Note: X.B.I.001 does not subject quartz oven tubes, oven diffuser 
tubes, blades, supports (except for
2 See annexes to the OBDI.
specially designed cages), bubblers, cassettes or crucibles specially 
designed for treatment equipment subject to authorisation in 
X.B.I.001.b.1.
a. equipment for the production of polysilicon and 
materials subject to authorisation in 3C001(3);
b. Equipment specially designed for the purification or 
processing of III/V and II/VI semiconductor materials 
controlled by 3C001, 3C002, 3C003, 3C004 or 3C005(4), 
except crystal extractors, for which see X.B.I.001.b.1.c 
below;
c. crystal extractors and crystal growth ovens, as follows:
Note: X.B.I.001.b.1.c does not subject diffusion and 
oxidation furnaces to authorisation.
1. annealing or recrystallisation equipment other than 
constant-temperature furnaces using high rates of 
energy transfer capable of processing slices at a 
rate exceeding 0.005 m2 per minute;
2. crystal extractors with 'recorded programme 
control' having one of the following 
characteristics:
a. refillable without replacing the crucible 
container;
3 See annexes to the OBDI.
4 See annexes to the OBDI.
b. capable of operating at a pressure 
greater than 2.5 x 105 Pa; or
c. capable of extracting crystals larger 
than 100 mm in diameter;
d. epitaxial growth equipment with 'recorded programme 
control' having one of the following characteristics:
1. capable of producing a silicon layer with 
thickness uniformity within ± 2.5 % 
along a distance of 200 mm or more;
2.capable of producing a layer of any material other than 
silicon with uniformity of slice thickness equal to 
or better than ± 3.5 %; or
3. rotation of individual slices during processing;
e. molecular beam epitaxial growth equipment;
f. magnetically enhanced 'sputtering' equipment with 
specially designed integrated loading chambers capable 
of transferring slices into an isolated vacuum 
environment;
g. equipment specially designed for ion implantation, ion-
enhanced or photo-enhanced diffusion, having one of the 
following characteristics
1.patterning capability;
2.beam energy (acceleration voltage) greater 
than 200 keV;
3. optimised to operate with a beam energy
(acceleration voltage) less than 10 keV; or
4.able to implant high-energy oxygen into a heated 
'substrate';
h. selective removal (etching) equipment with dry 
anisotropic methods (e.g. plasma) with 'recorded 
programme control', as follows
1.'in batches', having one of the following characteristics:
a.End-point determination, except for optical 
emission spectroscopy types; or
b.operating pressure (etch) of the reactor 
equal to or less than 26.66 Pa;
2. 'single slice', having one of the following 
characteristics:
a.End-point determination, except for optical 
emission spectroscopy types;
b.reactor operating pressure (etch) of 26.66 
Pa or less; or
c. handling of slices from cassette to cassette 
and to loading chambers;
Notes:
1. Batch' machines are machines that are not 
specially designed to process single slices. 
Such machines can process two or more 
slices simultaneously with parameters of
common process, e.g. RF power, 
temperature, etching gas species, flow 
rates.
2. Single slice' machines are defined as 
machines specially designed to process 
single slices. Such machines may use 
automatic slice handling techniques to load 
a single slice into the processing equipment. 
The definition includes equipment that can 
load and process several slices but where 
the cutting parameters, e.g. RF power or 
end point, can be determined independently 
for each individual slice.
i. chemical vapour deposition (CVD) equipment, e.g. 
plasma-enhanced chemical vapour deposition (PECVD) 
or photo-enhanced chemical vapour deposition, for the 
manufacture of semiconductor devices, having one of the 
following characteristics, for the deposition of oxides, 
nitrides, metals or polysilicon
1.chemical vapour deposition equipment operating 
below 105 Pa; or
2.PECVD equipment operating below 60 Pa or with 
automatic cassette-to-cassette and chamber-
loading slice handling;
Note: X.B.I.001.b.1.i does not control low vapour 
chemical vapour deposition systems.
pressure (LPCVD) or 'sputtering' equipment using a 
reagent.
j. Electron beam systems specially designed or modified for 
mask making or semiconductor device processing having 
any of the following characteristics
1.electrostatic beam deflection;
2.non-Gaussian, shaped beam profile;
3.numerical-analogue conversion rate above 3 MHz;
4.digital-to-analogue conversion accuracy greater 
than 12 bits; or
5.target-beam position feedback control accuracy of 
1 μm or more;
Note: X.B.I.001.b.1.j does not control electron beam 
deposition systems or general-purpose scanning electron 
microscopes.
k. surface finishing equipment for the treatment of 
semiconductor wafers as follows:
1. Equipment specially designed for backside 
processing  of slices thinner than 100 μm and 
subsequent separation; or
2. equipment specially designed to achieve a surface 
roughness of the active surface of a treated slice of 
a 2 sigma value equal to or less than
2 μm, total meter reading (TIR);
Note: X.B.I.001.b.1.k does not subject lapping and polishing 
equipment for the purpose of finishing the surface of slices to 
authorisation.
l. interconnecting equipment comprising single or multiple 
common vacuum chambers specially designed to allow the 
integration of any equipment licensed in X.B.I.001 into a 
complete system;
m. equipment with 'recorded programme control' using 
'lasers' for the repair or trimming of 'monolithic integrated 
circuits' having one of the following characteristics
1.positioning accuracy of less than ± 1 μm; or
2.spot size (width of cutting groove) less than 3 μm;
Technical Note: For the purpose of X.B.I.001.b.1., 'sputtering' is 
defined as an overlay coating process in which positive ions are 
accelerated by an electric field towards the surface of a target 
(coating material). The kinetic energy obtained from the impact 
of the ions is sufficient for the atoms on the target surface to be 
released to deposit on the substrate. (Note: cathodic atomisation 
using a triode, magnetron or radio frequency to increase coating 
adhesion and deposition rate are ordinary modifications of the 
process);
2. Masks, mask substrates, mask making equipment and image 
transfer equipment for the production of devices and components 
specified in X.B.I.001, as follows
Note: The term masks refers to masks used in electron beam 
lithography, X-ray lithography and ultraviolet lithography, as well 
as traditional ultraviolet and visible light photolithography.
a. finished masks, reticles and their models, except:
1. finished masks or reticles for the production of 
integrated circuits not controlled by 3A001(5); or
2. masks or reticles having both of the following 
characteristics:
a. are made on the basis of geometries of 2.5 
μm or more; and
b. the realisation does not include any special 
features that would change its intended use 
by means of production equipment or 
'software';
b. mask substrates, as follows:
1. "substrates" (e.g. glass, quartz, sapphire) coated with hard material 
(e.g. chromium, silicon, molybdenum) for the preparation of masks 
larger than 125 mm x 125 mm; or
2. specially designed substrates for ray masks
X;
c. equipment, other than general-purpose computers, 
specially designed for computer-aided design.
5 See annexes to the OBDI.
computer-aided design (CAD) for semiconductor devices or 
integrated circuits;
d. equipment or machines for the manufacture of masks or 
reticles, as follows:
1. sequential repetition photo-optical devices 
capable of producing arrays greater than 100 mm 
x 100 mm or capable of producing a single 
exposure greater than 6 mm x 6 mm in the 
(focal) plane of the image, or capable of 
producing line widths of less than 2.5 μm in the 
photoresist applied to the 'substrate';
2. equipment for the manufacture of masks or reticles 
using ion beam lithography or 'lasers', capable of 
producing line widths of less than 2.5 μm; or
3. equipment or media to modify masks or reticles or 
add films to eliminate defects;
Note: X.B.I.001.b.2.d.1 and b.2.d.2 do not subject 
equipment for the manufacture of masks using 
photo-optical methods available on the market 
prior to 1 January 1980 or performing no better 
than such equipment to authorisation.
e. equipment with 'recorded programme control' for the 
inspection of masks, reticles or films having:
1. a resolution of 0.25 μm or more; and
2. an accuracy of 0.75 μm or more over a distance 
between one or two coordinates equal to or greater 
than
63.5 mm;
Note: X.B.I.001.b.2.e does not control scanning 
microscopes for general use, except when they are 
specially designed and equipped f o r  automatic trace 
inspection.
f. Alignment and exposure equipment for the production of 
slices using photo-optical or X-ray methods, e.g. 
lithography equipment, including projection image 
transfer equipment and sequential repetition (continuous 
sequence on the slice) or sequential scanning (scanner) 
equipment, capable of performing one of the following 
functions
Note: X.B.I.001.b.2.f does not control contact alignment 
and exposure equipment and photo-optical mask 
proximity or contact image transfer equipment.
1. production of a plot size of less than 2.5 μm;
2. Alignment accuracy better than ± 0.25 μm (3 
sigma);
3. machine-to-machine overlap not better than 
± 0.3 μm; or
4. light source wavelength of less than 400 nm;
g. equipment using an electron, ion or X-ray beam for 
projection imaging capable of producing tracings of 
less than 2.5 μm;
Note: For deflected focused beam devices (direct writing 
systems), see X.B.I.001.b.1.j.
h. equipment using 'lasers' for direct writing on slices 
capable of producing tracings of less than 2.5 μm;
3. equipment for the assembly of integrated circuits, as follows:
a. die bonder with 'registered programme control' having all 
of the following characteristics:
1. specially designed for 'integrated circuits
hybrids';
2. X-Y stage positioning stroke
higher than
37.5 x 37.5 mm; and
3. positioning accuracy in the X-Y plane
greater than ± 10 μm;
b. equipment with 'recorded-programme control' to 
perform multiple welding spots in a single operation 
(e.g. welders for radial connectors, chip-carrier welders, 
strip welders);
c. Semi-automatic or automatic hot-head sealing machines, in 
which the head is locally heated to a higher temperature 
than the packet body, specially designed for packets of 
ceramic microcircuits subject to approval in 3A001(6) and 
with a flow rate of one packet per minute or more;
6 See annexes to the OBDI.
Note: X.B.I.001.b.3 does not subject general purpose 
resistance spot welders to authorisation.
4. clean room filters capable of providing air quality of 10 or 
fewer particles with a diameter of 0.3 μm or less per 0.02832 
m3 and their filter media.
Technical Note: For the purpose of X.B.I.001, 'stored programme control' is 
defined as a control using instructions stored in an electronic memory that can 
be executed by a processor to command the performance of predetermined 
functions. A piece of equipment may have 'stored programme control' if the 
electronic memory is internal or external to the equipment.
X.B.I.02 Equipment for the inspection or testing of electronic components and materials 
and their specially designed components and accessories.
a. Equipment specially designed for inspection or testing of electronic 
tubes, optical elements and specially designed components therefor 
controlled by 3A001(7) or X.A.I.001;
b. equipment specially designed for the inspection or testing of 
semiconductor devices, integrated circuits and 'electronic 
assemblies', as follows, and systems comprising or having the 
characteristics of such equipment:
Note: X.B.I.002.b also controls equipment used or modified for use in 
inspection or testing of other devices, such as imaging devices, electro-
optical devices and devices using acoustic waves.
1. inspection equipment with 'recorded programme control' for 
automatic detection of defects, errors or contaminants of 0.6 μm 
or less in or on processed slices and substrates, other than 
circuits
7 See annexes to the OBDI.
prints or chips, which use optical imaging techniques for track 
comparison;
Note: X.B.I.002.b.1 does not control general purpose scanning 
electron microscopes, except when they are specially designed and 
equipped for automatic trace inspection.
2. specially designed 'recorded programme control' 
measurement and analysis equipment, as follows:
a. specially designed for measuring the oxygen or carbon 
content of semiconductor materials;
b. linewidth measuring equipment with a resolution of 1 
μm or more;
c. specially designed flatness measuring instruments capable 
of measuring flatness deviations of 10 μm or less with a 
resolution of 1 μm or more;
3. equipment with 'recorded programme control' for 
controlling slices having one of the following 
characteristics:
a. positioning accuracy greater than 3.5 μm;
b. capable of testing devices with more than 68 output 
terminals; or
c. capable of testing at a frequency above 1 GHz;
4. testing equipment as follows:
a. equipment with 'recorded programme control' 
specially designed to test devices
discrete semiconductors and unencapsulated plates, 
capable of testing at frequencies above 18 GHz;
Technical Note: Discrete semiconductor devices include 
photocells and solar cells.
b. equipment with 'recorded programme control' specially 
designed to test integrated circuits and their 'electronic 
assemblies', capable of performing functional tests:
1. at a 'signal cadence' of more than 20 MHz; or
2. at a 'signal rate' higher than 10 MHz but not 
exceeding 20 MHz and capable of testing packages 
of more than 68 output terminals.
Notes: X.B.I.002.b.4.b does not subject specially designed 
test equipment to authorisation:
1. memoirs;
2. assemblies or categories of 'electronic 
assemblies' for home and leisure 
applications; and
3. electronic components, "electronic assemblies" and 
integrated circuits not controlled by 3A001(8) or 
X.A.I.001, provided that such test equipment does 
not incorporate computing facilities with 'user 
accessible programmability'.
Technical note: For the purposes of X.B.I.002.b.4.b, 'signal 
rate' means the maximum frequency of numerical 
operation of a test apparatus. It is therefore equivalent to
8 See annexes to the OBDI.
maximum data rate of a test device in non-multiplied mode. 
It is also referred to as test speed, maximum digital 
frequency or maximum digital speed.
c. equipment specially designed to determine the 
performance of arrays in the focal plane at wavelengths 
exceeding 1 200 nm using 'recorded programme control' 
measurements or computer-aided evaluation and having 
one of the following characteristics
1. use scanning beam diameters of less than 0.12 
mm;
2. are designed to measure photosensitive performance 
parameters and to assess frequency response, 
modulation transfer function, response factor 
uniformity or noise; or
3. are designed to evaluate matrices capable of 
creating images with more than 32 x 32 linear 
elements;
5. Electron beam testing systems designed to operate at 3 keV or 
less, or 'laser' beam systems for the non-contact testing of live 
semiconductor devices, having one of the following 
characteristics
a. stroboscopic capability with beam extinguishing 
or strobe scanning of the detector;
b. an electronic spectrometer for voltage measurement with 
a resolution of less than 0.5 V; or
c. electrical test assemblies for performance analysis of 
integrated circuits;
Note: X.B.I.002.b.5 does not control scanning electron 
microscopes, except when they are specially designed and 
equipped for the non-contact inspection of a live semiconductor 
device.
6. multifunctional focused ion beam systems with 'recorded 
programme control' specially designed for the fabrication, repair, 
physical pattern analysis and testing of semiconductor masks or 
devices, having one of the following characteristics
a. target-beam position feedback control accuracy of 1 μm or more; or
b. numerical-to-analogue conversion accuracy greater than
12 bits;
7. Particle measurement systems using 'lasers' designed to measure 
the size and concentration of particles in the air having both of 
the following characteristics
a. capable of measuring particles of a size less than or equal to 0.2 μm with 
a flow rate of 0.02832 m3 per minute or more; and
b. capable of characterising clean air of class 10 or better.
Technical Note: For the purpose of X.B.I.002, 'stored programme control' 
is defined as a control using instructions stored in an electronic memory 
that can be executed by a processor to command the performance of 
predetermined functions. A piece of equipment may have 'stored 
programme control' if the electronic memory is internal or external to the 
equipment.
X.B.I.03 Equipment for the manufacture of printed circuit boards and their specially 
designed components and accessories, as follows
a. photographic film developing equipment;
b. coating equipment with welding mask;
c. photoplotter equipment;
d. plating or electroplating deposition equipment;
e. vacuum chambers and vacuum presses;
f. roller mills;
g. alignment equipment; or
h. engraving equipment.
X.B.I.04 Automated optical inspection equipment for testing printed circuit boards, based 
on optical or electrical sensors and capable of detecting at least one of the 
following quality defects
a. spacing, surface area, volume or height;
b. billboarding;
c. components (presence, absence, reversal, polarity or misalignment);
d. welding (bridges, insufficient welding joints);
e. connections (insufficient paste, lifting);
f. tombstoning; or
g. electrical circuit (short circuits, open circuits, resistance, 
capacitance, power supply, network performance).
X.C.I.01 Photosensitive (resist) positive resins designed for semiconductor lithography 
specially adapted (optimised) for use at wavelengths between 370 and 193 nm.
X.C.I.02 Chemicals and materials of the type used in the production of printed circuit 
boards, as follows:
a. composite substrates for printed circuit boards made of glass fibre 
or cotton (e.g.
FR-4, FR-2, FR-6, CEM-1, G-10, etc.);
b. multilayer substrates for printed circuit boards containing at least one 
layer of any of the following materials:
1. aluminium;
2. polytetrafluoroethylene (PTFE); or
3. ceramic materials (e.g. alumina, titanium oxide, etc.);
c. chemicals for etching fluid:
1. ferric chloride (CAS 7705-08-0);
2. copper chloride (CAS 7447-39-4);
3. ammonium persulphate (CAS 7727-54-0);
4. sodium persulphate (CAS 7775-27-1); or
5. Chemical preparations specially designed for etching and 
containing at least one of the chemicals included in 
X.C.I.002.c.1 to
X.C.I.002.c.4;
Note: X.C.I.002.c does not control "chemical mixtures" containing one 
or more of the chemicals specified in X.C.I.002.c in which no 
individually specified chemical constitutes more than 10 % by weight of 
the mixture.
d. copper foils of not less than 95 % purity and less than 100 µm thickness;
f. polymeric substances and their films with a thickness of less than 0.5 
mm, as follows:
1. aromatic polyimides,
2. parylenes;
3. benzocyclobutenes (BCB); or
4. polybenzothiazoles.
X.D.I.01 "Software" specially designed for the "development", "production" or "use" of 
electronic devices or components controlled by X.A.I.001, general purpose 
electronic equipment controlled by X.A.I.002, or manufacturing and test 
equipment controlled by X.B.I.001 or X.B.I.002; or "software" specially 
designed for the "use" of equipment controlled by 3B001.g. and 3B001.h.(9).
X.D.I.02 "Software' specially designed for the testing, 'development' or 'production' of 
printed circuit boards (PCBs).
X.E.I.01 "Technology" for the "development", "production" or "use" of electronic 
devices or components controlled by X.A.I.001, general purpose electronic 
equipment controlled by X.A.I.002, or manufacturing and testing equipment 
controlled by X.A.I.002.
X.B.I.001 or X.B.I.002, or material subject to authorisation in X.C.I.001.
X.E.I.02 "Technology" for the "development", "production" or "use" of printed 
circuit boards.
Category II - Computers
Note: Category II does not subject goods for the personal use of natural persons 
to authorisation.
9 See annexes to the OBDI. 10 See attachments to the OBDI.
X.A.II.01 Computers, 'electronic assemblies' and related equipment, not controlled 
under 4A001 or 4A003(10 ) and specially designed components therefor.
Note: The control status of the "digital computers" and related equipment 
described in X.A.II.001 is determined by the control status of other equipment 
or systems, provided:
a. digital computers' or related equipment are essential to the 
functioning of the other equipment or systems;
b. the 'digital computers' or related equipment are not a 'principal 
element' of the other equipment or systems; and
N.B.1: The control status of "signal processing" or "image 
enhancement" equipment specially designed for other equipment 
and having functions limited to those necessary for the operation 
of the latter equipment is determined by the control status of the 
latter equipment even if the equipment exceeds the "principal 
element" criterion.
N.B.2: The control status of "digital computers" or related 
equipment for telecommunications equipment is governed by 
Category 5, Part 1 (Telecommunications)(10).
c. the 'technology' relating to 'digital computers' and 
related equipment is determined by 4E (11).
10 See annexes to the OBDI.
11 See annexes to the OBDI.
a. Electronic computers and related equipment and their 'electronic 
assemblies' and specially designed components, intended to operate at an 
ambient temperature above 343 K (70 °C);
b. "digital computers", including "signal processing" or "image 
enhancement" equipment with an "adapted peak performance" ("APP") of 
0.0128 weighted teraFLOPS (WT) or more;
c. "electronic assemblies", which are specially designed or modified to 
increase performance by aggregating processors, as follows:
1. designed to be capable of aggregation in configurations of 16 or 
more processors;
2. not used;
Note 1: X.A.II.001.c. applies only to "electronic assemblies" and 
programmable interconnections with an "APP" not exceeding the limits 
in X.A.II.001.b., when shipped as unintegrated "electronic assemblies". 
It does not apply to "electronic assemblies" inherently limited by the 
nature of their design for use as related equipment controlled under 
X.A.II.001.k.
Note 2: X.A.II.001.c does not control any "electronic assembly" specially 
designed for a product or family of products whose maximum 
configuration does not exceed the limits specified in X.A.II.001.b.
d. not used;
e. not used;
f. equipment for 'signal processing' or 'image enhancement' having an 
'adapted peak performance' ('APP') of 0.0128 weighted teraFLOPS 
(WT) or more;
g. not used;
h. not used;
i. equipment containing 'interface terminal equipment' that exceeds 
the limits laid down in X.A.III.101;
Technical Note: For the purposes of X.A.II.001.i, 'terminal interface 
equipment' is defined as equipment into which information enters or 
leaves a telecommunications system, i.e. telephone, data device, 
computer, etc.
j. equipment specially designed to provide external interconnections of 
'digital computers' or associated equipment enabling communications 
with a data rate of more than 80 Mbyte/s;
Note: X.A.II.001.j does not subject internal interconnection equipment 
(such as back panels, buses), passive interconnection equipment, 
'network access control units' or 'communication channel controllers' to 
authorisation.
Technical Note: For the purpose of X.A.II.001.j., 'communications channel 
controller' means a physical interface that controls the movement of 
synchronous or asynchronous digital information. It is an assembly that 
may be integrated into computer or telecommunication equipment to 
provide access to communications;
k. Hybrid computers and their 'electronic assemblies' and specially 
designed components containing analogue-to-digital converters 
having all of the following characteristics
1. 32 channels or more; and
2. 14-bit resolution (plus sign bits) or higher with a conversion rate 
of 200 000 Hz or more.
X.D.II.01 "test 'programme' and validation 'software', 'software' enabling the
automatic generation of operating system 'source code' and 'software' specially 
designed for 'real time processing' data equipment.
a. Test "programme" and validation "software" using mathematical and 
analytical techniques and designed or modified for "programmes" with 
more than
500 000 'source code' instructions;
b. 'software' that enables the automatic generation of 'source codes' from 
data acquired online from external sensors described in the OBDI 
annexes; or
c. "operating system 'software' specially designed for 'real-time 
processing' data equipment that guarantees a 'global outage waiting 
time' of less than 20 μs.
Technical Note: For the purpose of X.D.II.001, 'global interrupt waiting time' is 
defined as the time required for a computer system to recognise an interruption 
due to a phenomenon, provide the interruption and perform a contextual 
switchover to another alternative activity, resident in memory, while waiting for 
the interruption.
X.D. II.002 'Software', other than that controlled by 4D001( 12) specially designed or 
modified for the "development", "production" or "use" of equipment 
controlled by 4A101(13).
X . E . I I . 0 1 "Technology" for the "development", "production" or "use" of  
equipment controlled under X.A.II.001 or "software" controlled under 
X.D.II.001 or X.D.II.002.
X . E . I I . 0 2 "Technology" for the "development" or "production" of equipment designed 
for the "processing of multiple data streams".
12 See annexes to the OBDI.
13 See annexes to the OBDI.
Technical Note: For the purposes of X.E.II.002, 'multiple data stream 
processing' means a microprogramme or equipment architecture technique for 
the simultaneous processing of two or more data sequences under the control of 
one or more sequences of instructions by means such as:
1. single instruction multiple data (SIMD) architectures such as matrix or 
vector processors;
2. single instruction multiple data architectures (MSIMD);
3. multiple instruction multiple data (MIMD) architectures, including tightly 
coupled, fully coupled or loosely coupled; or
4. structured networks of treatment elements, including systolic networks.
Category III. Part 1 - Telecommunications
Note: Category III, Part 1 does not subject goods for personal use by natural 
persons to authorisation.
X.A.III.101Telecommunications equipment
a. Telecommunications equipment, of any type, not controlled by 
5A001.a.(14), specially designed to operate outside the temperature range 
219 K (-54 °C) to 397 K (124 °C);
b. telecommunications transmission equipment and systems, and 
specially designed components and accessories thereof, having 
any of the following characteristics, functions or features:
Note: Telecommunications transmission equipment is:
a. of the following categories or combinations thereof:
1. radio equipment (e.g. transmitters, receivers and 
transceivers);
2. line terminal equipment;
3. intermediate amplification equipment;
4. repetition equipment;
5. regeneration equipment;
6. translation encoders (transcoders);
7. multiplex equipment (including statistical multiplexes);
8. modulators/demodulators (modems);
9. transmultiplex equipment (see CCITT Recommendation 
G.701);
14 See annexes to the OBDI.
10. digital interconnection equipment with 'recorded 
programme control';
11. 'adaptation ports' (gateways) and bridges;
12. 'media access unit'; and
b. designed for use in single- or multi-channel communications by 
any of the following means:
1. cable (line);
2. coaxial cable;
3. fibre optic cable;
4. electromagnetic radiation; or
5. propagation of underwater acoustic waves.
1. using digital techniques, including the digital processing of 
analogue signals, and designed to operate at the highest level 
multiplex point at a 'digital transfer rate' of more than 45 Mbit/s 
or a 'total digital transfer rate' of more than 90 Mbit/s;
Note: X.A.III.101.b.1 does not control equipment specially 
designed to be integrated and operated in a civil satellite system.
2. modems using the 'bandwidth of a voice-frequency channel' 
with a 'data rate' higher than 9,600 bits/s;
3. digital interconnection equipment with 'registered programme 
control' having a 'digital transfer rate' of more than 8.5 Mbit/s 
per port;
4. equipment containing:
a. "network access control units" and their connected 
common carrier having a 'digital transfer rate' greater 
than 33 Mbit/s; or
b. Communications channel controllers' having a digital 
output with a 'data rate' greater than 64 000 bits/s per 
channel;
Note: If any unauthorised equipment contains a 'network access 
control unit', that equipment may not have any type of 
telecommunications interface other than those described but not 
subject to authorisation in X.A.III.101.b.4.
5. using a 'laser' and having one of the following characteristics:
a. transmission wavelength greater than 1 000 nm; or
b. based on analogue techniques and having a 
bandwidth above 45 MHz;
c. based on coherent optical transmission or coherent optical 
detection techniques (also called heterodyne or homodyne 
optical detection techniques);
d. based on wavelength-division multiplexing techniques; 
or
e. capable of 'optical amplification';
6. radio equipment operating at input or output frequencies higher 
than:
a. 31 GHz for satellite earth station applications; or
b. 26.5 GHz for other applications;
Note: X.A.III.101.b.6 does not control equipment for civil use that 
complies with the International Telecommunication Union (ITU) 
frequency band allocation between 26.5 GHz and 31 GHz.
7. radio equipment:
a. based on quadrature amplitude modulation (QAM) 
techniques beyond level 4 if the 'total digital transfer rate' 
is greater than 8.5 Mbit/s;
b. based on QAM techniques beyond level 16 if the 'total 
digital transfer rate' is 8.5 Mbit/s or less;
c. based on other digital modulation techniques and 
having a 'spectral efficiency' greater than 3 bits/s/Hz; or
d. operating in the 1.5 MHz to 87.5 MHz band and 
incorporating adaptive techniques that ensure the 
suppression of an interfering signal exceeding 15 dB.
Notes:
1. X.A.III.101.b.7 does not subject equipment specially 
designed to be integrated and operated in a civil satellite 
system to authorisation.
2. X.A.III.101.b.7 does not subject radio relay 
equipment operating in bands allocated by the ITU 
(International Telecommunication Union) to 
authorisation:
a. with one of the following characteristics:
1. not exceeding 960 MHz; or
2. 'total digital transfer rate' not exceeding 8.5 
Mbit/s; and
b. with 'spectral efficiency' not exceeding 4 bits/s/Hz;
c.switching equipment with 'recorded programme control' and related 
signalling systems, and specially designed components and accessories 
thereof, having any of the following characteristics, functions or features
Note: Statistical multiplexers that provide switching with numeric input 
and output are treated as switches with 'registered programme control'.
1. data (message) switching' equipment or systems designed for 
'packet operation', 'electronic assemblies' and their components 
other than those specified in the annexes to the OBDI;
2. not used;
3. routing or switching of 'datagram' packets;
Note: X.A.III.101.c.3 does not subject networks using only 
'network access control units' or 'network access control 
units' themselves to authorisation.
4. not used;
5. multilevel priority and pre-emption for circuit switching;
Note: X.A.III.101.c.5 does not subject single-level call preemption 
to authorisation.
6. designed for the automatic transfer of cellular radio calls 
to other cellular switches or for connecting
automatic to a centralised subscriber database common to several 
switches;
7. containing digital interconnection equipment with 'recorded 
programme control' having a 'digital transfer rate' greater than 
8.5 Mbit/s per port;
8. 'Common channel signalling' in non-associated or quasi-
associated operation mode;
9. 'dynamic adaptive routing';
10. packet switches, circuit switches and routers with ports or lines 
that pass:
a. a 'data rate' of 64 000 bits/s per channel for a 
'communications channel controller'; or
Note: X.A.III.101.c.10.a does not subject composite 
multiplex links consisting solely of communication channels 
not individually subject to authorisation in X.A.III.101.b.1 to 
authorisation.
b. a 'digital transfer rate' of 33 Mbit/s for a 'network access 
control unit' and associated common media;
Note: X.A.III.101.c.10 does not subject switches or packet 
routers with ports or lines that do not exceed the limits in 
X.A.III.101.c.10 to authorisation.
11. optical switching';
12. based on 'asynchronous transfer mode' ('ATM') techniques;
d. optical fibres and fibre optic cables longer than 50 m designed for 
single-mode operation;
e. centralised network control with all the following features:
1. receiving data from nodes; and
2. processing of these data in order to control traffic without 
the need for operator decisions, thus realising a
'dynamic adaptive routing';
Note 1: X.A.III.101.e does not include cases in which routing is decided 
on the basis of previously defined information.
Note 2: X.A.III.101.e allows traffic control according to predictable 
statistical traffic conditions.
f. phase-aligned antennas, operating above 10.5 GHz, containing active 
elements and distributed components, and designed to allow electronic 
control of beam shape and orientation, except for landing systems using 
instruments meeting International Civil Aviation Organisation (ICAO) 
standards (microwave landing systems, MLS)
g. mobile communication equipment, other than those specified in the 
annexes of the OBDI, 'electronic assemblies' and their components; or
h. radio-bridge communication equipment designed for use at frequencies 
of 19.7 GHz and above, and components thereof, other than those 
specified in the Annexes to the OBDI.
Technical note: For the purposes of X.A.III.101:
1) asynchronous transfer mode' (asynchronous transfer mode, 'ATM'): a 
transfer mode in which information is organised in cells; it is 
asynchronous in the sense that the periodic sequence of cells depends on 
the required or instantaneous bit rate;
2) voice frequency channel bandwidth': data communication equipment 
designed to operate with a voice frequency channel of 3 100 Hz, as 
defined in the Recommendation
G.151 of the CCITT;
3) Communications channel controller': a physical interface that controls 
the circulation of synchronous or asynchronous digital information. It 
is an assembly that can be integrated into computer or 
telecommunications equipment to provide access to communications;
4) Datagram' means an autonomous and independent data entity that 
carries the information required for its routing from the originating 
data terminal equipment to the destination data terminal equipment 
without the need for prior exchange between the originating and 
destination data terminal equipment and the transport network;
5) 'fast select': a complementary service applicable to virtual calls that 
allows the data terminal equipment to increase its ability to transmit 
data in connection and call termination 'packets' beyond the basic 
capabilities of a virtual call;
6) 'Adaptation gateway' (gateway): function, performed by any 
combination of equipment and 'software', to ensure the conversion of 
conventions used to represent, process or communicate information in 
one system into the corresponding but different conventions used in 
another system;
7) Integrated Services Digital Network (ISDN): a unified end-to-end digital 
network in which data from any type of communication (e.g. voice, text, 
data, static and dynamic images) are transmitted from a port (terminal) 
in the exchange (switch) on a single access line to and from the 
subscriber;
8) Package' means a group of binary elements, including data and call 
control signals, switched as a block. The data, call control signals and 
any error control information are presented in a specific format;
9) Common channel signalling': the transmission of control information 
(signalling) via a channel separate from that used for messages. The 
signalling channel usually controls multiple message channels;
10) Data rate': speed defined by ITU Recommendation 53- 36, taking into 
account that for non-binary modulation, baud and bits per second are 
not equivalent. Binary digits for encoding, verification and 
synchronisation functions are included;
11) Dynamic adaptive routing': automatic re-routing of traffic based on the 
detection and analysis of actual conditions in the network;
12) 'Media access unit' means equipment containing one or more 
communication interfaces ('network access control unit', 
'communications channel controller', modem or computer bus) 
intended to connect terminal equipment to a network;
13) spectral efficiency': 'numerical transfer rate' [bits/s] / spectrum 
bandwidth 6 dB in Hz;
14) 'Recorded program control': control using instructions stored in an 
electronic memory that can be executed by a processor to command 
the execution of predetermined functions.
Note: An appliance can be with 'recorded programme control' if the electronic 
memory is internal or external to the appliance.
X.B.III.101Testing equipment in the telecommunications sector, other than those specified 
in the Annexes to the OBDI.
X.C.III. 101Preforms of glass or any other material, optimised for the manufacture of 
optical fibres subject to authorisation in X.A.III.101.
X.D.III.101Software " specially designed or modified for the "development", 
"production" or "use" of equipment controlled under X.A.III.101 and 
X.B.III.101, and "software" for dynamic adaptive routing described as follows
a. "software", in a form other than machine-executable, 
specially designed for 'dynamic adaptive routing';
b. not used.
X.E.III.101 "Technology " for the "development", "production" or "use" of equipment 
controlled under X.A.III.101 or X.B.III.101, or "software" controlled under 
X.D.III.101 and other "technology" as follows
a. "specific 'technologies' as follows:
1. 'technology' for treating and applying specially designed coatings 
to optical fibres to make them suitable for underwater use;
2. "technology" for the "development" of equipment using 
'synchronous digital hierarchy' ('SDH') or 'synchronous optical 
network' ('SONET') techniques.
Technical note: For the purposes of X.E.III.101:
1) Synchronous digital hierarchy' (SDH): a digital hierarchy that provides 
a means to manage, multiply and access various forms of digital traffic 
using a synchronous transmission structure over different types of 
media. The structure is based on the Synchronous Transport Module 
(STM) defined by CCITT Recommendations G.703, G.707, G.708, G.709 
and others currently being published. The first-level speed of the 
'synchronous digital hierarchy' is 155.52 Mbit/s;
2) Synchronous Optical Network' (SONET): a network that provides a 
means of managing, multiplexing and accessing different forms of 
digital traffic using a synchronous transmission structure over optical 
fibres. The format is the North American version of the 'synchronous 
digital hierarchy' (SDH) and also employs the synchronous transport 
module (STM). However, it employs the synchronous transport signal 
(STS) as the basic transport module with a top-level speed of 51.81 
Mbit/s. The SONET standards are being integrated with those of the 
'SDH'.
Category III. Part 2 - Information Security
Note: Category III, Part 2 does not subject goods to authorisation for
personal use by natural persons. X.A.III. 201Equipment as follows:
a. not used;
b. not used;
c. goods classified as mass-market crypto goods in accordance with the 
Cryptography Note (Note 3 in Category 5, Part 2)(15).
15 See annexes to the OBDI.
X.D.III.201 "Software" for "information security" as follows:
Note: This item does not subject to authorisation 'software' designed or modified 
for the prevention of premeditated damage to computers, e.g. viruses, where the 
use of 'encryption' is limited to authentication, digital signature and/or 
decryption of data or files.
a. not used;
b. not used;
c. "software" classified as mass-market cryptography "software" in 
accordance with the Cryptography Note (Note 3 in Category 5, Part 
2)(16).
X.E.III.201 'Technology' for 'information security' in accordance with the General 
Technology Note as follows
a. not used;
b. "technology" other than that specified in the Annexes to the OBDI for 
the "use" of mass-market goods subject to authorisation in X.A.III.201.c 
or of
"mass market 'software' subject to authorisation in X.D.III.201.c.
Category IV - Sensors and Lasers
X.A.IV.01 Naval or land-based acoustic equipment capable of detecting or locating 
underwater objects or features or of detecting the position of surface ships or 
vehicles
underwater, and specially designed components, other than those specified inannexes of 
the OBDI.X.A.IV.002 Optical sensors, as follows:
16 See annexes to the OBDI.
a. image intensifier tubes and their specially designed components, as 
follows:
1. image intensifier tubes with all the following characteristics:
a. peak response in the wavelength range above 400 nm, 
but not exceeding 1 050 nm;
b. a microchannel plate for electronic image 
amplification with a hole spacing (centre to 
centre) of less than 25 μm; and
c. with one of the following characteristics:
1. an S-20, S-25 or multi-alkali photocathode;
or
2. a GaAs or GaInAs photocathode;
2. specially designed microchannel plates with both of the 
following characteristics:
a. 15 000 or more hollow tubes per plate; and
b. hole spacing (centre to centre)
less than 25 μm;
b. Direct view imaging equipment operating in the visible or infrared 
spectrum incorporating image intensifier tubes having the characteristicsspecified in 
X.A.IV.002.a.1. X.A.IV.003 Imaging equipment, as follows
a. cameras meeting the criteria of Note 3 to 6A003.b.4( 17);
b. not used.
17 See annexes to the OBDI.
X.A.IV.04 Optical equipment, as follows:
Note: X.A.IV.004 does not subject optical filters with fixed air layers or Lyot-
type filters to authorisation.
a. optical filters:
1. filters for wavelengths longer than 250 nm, including multilayer 
optical coatings and having one of the following two 
characteristics:
a. bandwidths of 1 nm or less (total width - half intensity) 
and peak transmission of 90 % or more; or
b. passbands of 0.1 nm or less (total width - half intensity) 
and peak transmission of 50 % or more;
2. filters for wavelengths longer than 250 nm, having all the 
following characteristics:
a. tunable over a spectral band of 500 nm or more;
b. instantaneous optical bandwidth of 1.25 nm or less;
c. wavelength readjustable to within 0.1 ms with an 
accuracy of 1 nm or better in the tunable spectral 
band; and
d. single peak transmission of 91 % or more;
3. optical opacity switches (filters) with a field of view of 30° or 
more and a response time of 1 ns or less;
b. fluorinated fibre' cables, or their optical fibres, with an attenuation of less 
than 4 dB/km in the wavelength range above 1 000 nm but not exceeding 
3 000 nm.
Technical Note: For the purposes of X.A.IV.004.b, 'fluorinated fibres' are 
defined as fibres manufactured from raw fluoride compounds.
X.A.IV.05 "Laser', as follows:
a. "Carbon dioxide ( CO2) 'lasers' having at least one of the following 
characteristics:
1. continuous wave output power exceeding 10 kW;
2. pulse output with 'pulse duration' greater than 10 μs; and
a. average output power greater than 10 kW; or
b. "impulsive 'peak power' exceeding 100 kW; or
3. pulse output with 'pulse duration' of 10 μs or less; and
a. impulse energy exceeding 5 J per pulse and 'peak power' 
exceeding 2.5 kW; or
b. average output power greater than 2.5 kW;
b. semiconductor lasers, as follows:
1. "individual transverse single-mode semiconductor 'lasers', having:
a. average output power greater than 100 mW; or
b. wavelength greater than 1 050 nm;
2. "Individual transverse multimode semiconductor 'lasers' or arrays 
of individual semiconductor 'lasers' with a wavelength greater 
than 1 050 nm;
c. "Ruby 'lasers' with an output energy of more than 20 J per pulse;
d. non-"tunable" "pulsed lasers" having an output wavelength 
greater than 975 nm but not exceeding 1 150 nm and having one 
of the following characteristics
1. 'pulse duration' of 1 ns or more but not more than 1 μs with one 
of the following characteristics:
a. transverse single-mode output with one of the 
following characteristics:
1. 'wall-plug efficiency' greater than 12 %, 'average 
output power' greater than 10 W and capable of 
operating at a pulse repetition frequency greater 
than
1 kHz; or
2. 'average output power' greater than 20 W; or
b. transverse multimode output with one of the 
following characteristics:
1. 'wall-plug efficiency' above 18 % and 'average 
output power' above 30 W;
2. 'peak power' exceeding 200 MW; or
3. 'average output power' greater than 50 W; or
2. 'pulse duration' of more than 1 μs with one of the following 
characteristics:
a. transverse single-mode output with one of the 
following characteristics:
1. 'wall-plug efficiency' greater than 12 %, 
'average output power' greater than 10 W and 
capable of
operate at a pulse repetition frequency higher than
1 kHz; or
2. 'average output power' greater than 20 W; or
b. transverse multimode output with one of the 
following characteristics:
1. 'wall-plug efficiency' greater than 18 % and 
'average output power' greater than 30 W; or
2. 'average power output' greater than 500 W;
e. non-"tunable" continuous wave "lasers" with an output wavelength 
greater than 975 nm but not exceeding 1 150 nm and having one of 
the following characteristics
1. transverse single-mode output with one of the following 
characteristics:
a. 'wall-plug efficiency' greater than 12 %, 'average 
output power' greater than 10 W and capable of 
operating at a pulse repetition frequency greater than 1 
kHz; or
b. 'average output power' greater than 50 W; or
2. transverse multimode output with one of the following 
characteristics:
a. 'wall-plug efficiency' greater than 18 % and 'average 
output power' greater than 30 W; or
b. 'average power output' greater than 500 W;
Note: X.A.IV.005.e.2.b does not control industrial 
multimode transverse output 'lasers' with an output 
power of 2 kW or less and total weight
exceeding 1 200 kg. For the purposes of this note, the total 
weight includes all components necessary for the operation 
of the "laser", e.g. "laser", power supply, heat exchanger, 
but does not include external optical equipment for beam 
adjustment and/or emission.
f. "non-'tunable' 'lasers' having a wavelength greater than 1 400 nm but not 
exceeding 1 555 nm and having one of the following characteristics
1. output energy exceeding 100 mJ per pulse and pulsed 'peak 
power' exceeding 1 W; or
2. average or continuous wave output power greater than 1 W;
g. "free-electron 'lasers'.
Technical note: For the purposes of X.A.IV.005, 'wall-plug efficiency' is 
defined as the ratio of 'laser' output power (or 'average output power') to 
the total input power required to operate the 'laser', including power 
supply/conditioning and thermal conditioning/heat exchanger.
X.A.IV.06 'Magnetometers', 'superconducting' electromagnetic sensors and specially 
designed components thereof, as follows:
a. "magnetometers", other than those specified in the annexes to the OBDI, 
having a 'sensitivity' of less (better) than 1.0 nT (rms) per square root 
Hz;
Technical note: For the purposes of X.A.IV.006.a, 'sensitivity' (noise 
level) means the rms value of the noise floor of the device limited to the 
lowest measurable signal.
b. superconductive' electromagnetic sensors, components manufactured 
from 'superconductive' materials:
1. designed to operate at temperatures below the 'critical 
temperature' of at least one of their 'superconducting' 
constituents (including Josephson effect devices or quantum 
interference 'superconducting' devices (SQUIDs));
2. designed to detect electromagnetic field variations at 
frequencies of 1 kHz or less; and
3. having one of the following characteristics:
a. equipped with thin-film SQUIDs with a minimum 
element size of less than 2 μm and associated input 
and output coupling circuits;
b. designed to operate with a magnetic field change 
rate of more than 1 x 106 quanta of magnetic flux 
per second;
c. designed to operate in the earth's magnetic field without 
magnetic shielding; or
d. having a temperature coefficient smaller (smaller) than 
0.1 quantum/K of magnetic flux.
X.A.IV.07 Gravity meters for ground use, other than those specified in the Common 
Military List or the Annexes to the OBDI, as follows
a. having a static accuracy of less (better) than 100 μGal; or
b. of the quartz element type (Worden).
X.A.IV.08 Radar systems and equipment and major components for radar, other than 
those specified in the Annexes to the OBDI, and their components 
specifically
designed, as follows:
a. avionic radar equipment, other than those specified in the Annexes to 
the OBDI, and specially designed components thereof;
b. 'laser' radar equipment 'qualified for space use' or equipment for the 
detection and measurement of distance by light (LIDAR) specially 
designed for surveying or meteorological observation;
c. Enhanced visual systems for millimetre-wave radar mapping specially 
designed for rotary-wing aircraft, having all the following 
characteristics
1. operating at a frequency of 94 GHz;
2. average output power of less than 20 mW;
3. radar beam width of 1 degree; and
4. operating range of 1 500 m or more.
X.A.IV.09 Specific treatment equipment, as follows
a. seismic survey equipment not subject to authorisation in X.A.IV.009.c;
b. radiation-resistant television cameras other than those specified in the 
Annexes to the OBDI; or
c. seismic intrusion detectors that detect, classify and locate the source of 
the detected signal.
X.B.IV.01 Equipment, including tools, dies, fixtures or gauges, and other specially 
designed components and accessories thereof, specially designed or 
modified for the following applications
a. for the manufacture or control of:
1. magnetic wigglers for free-electron 'lasers';
2. photo-injectors for free-electron 'lasers';
b. for adjusting the longitudinal magnetic field of free-electron 
'lasers' to the required tolerances.
X.C.IV.01 Optical fibre sensors structurally modified to have a 'beat length' of less than 
500 mm (high birefringence) or optical sensor materials not described in 
6C002.b(18) and having a zinc content of 6 % or more per 'mole fraction'.
Technical note: For the purposes of X.C.IV.001:
1) Molar fraction' means the ratio of moles of ZnTe to the sum of 
moles of CdTe and ZnTe present in the crystal;
18 See annexes to the OBDI.
2) beat length' means the distance that two orthogonally polarised 
signals, initially in phase, must travel to achieve a phase difference 
of 2 radians. X.C.IV.002 Optical materials, 
as follows:
a. materials with low optical absorption, as follows:
1. crude fluoride compounds containing ingredients with a purity of 
99.999 % or more; or
Note: X.C.IV.002.a.1 subjects zirconium or aluminium fluorides 
and variants to authorisation.
2. unwrought fluorinated glass obtained from compounds 
controlled under 6C004.e.1(19);
b. Optical Fibre Preforms' consisting of bulk fluoride compounds 
containing ingredients of purity of 99.999 % or greater, specially 
designed for the manufacture of 'fluorinated fibres' controlled under 
X.A.IV.004.b.
Technical note: For the purposes of X.C.IV.002:
1) fluorinated fibres': fibres manufactured from raw fluoride compounds;
2) optical fibre preforms' means rods, ingots or rods of glass, plastic or 
other materials specially treated for use in the manufacture of optical 
fibres. The characteristics of the preforms determine the basic 
parameters of the optical fibres resulting from their drawing.
19 See annexes to the OBDI.
X.D.IV.01 "Software', other than that specified in the Common Military List or in the 
Annexes to the OBDI, specially designed for the 'development', 'production' 
or 'use' of goods controlled by 6A002, 6A003(20), X.A.IV.001, X.A.IV.006, 
X.A.IV.007, or X.A.IV.008.
X.D.IV.02 "Software" specially designed for the "development" or "production" of 
equipment controlled under X.A.IV.002, X.A.IV.004, or X.A.IV.005.
X.D.IV.03 Other 'software', as follows:
a. "air traffic control (ATC) application 'software' 'programs' designed to be 
located in general-purpose computers installed in air traffic control 
centres and capable of automatically transmitting radar target data (if not 
related to secondary surveillance radar data - SRR) from the host ATC 
centre to another ATC centre;
b. "software" specially designed for intrusion detection seismic detectors 
in X.A.IV.009.c; or
20 See annexes to the OBDI.
c. "specially designed 'source code' for seismic intrusion 
detectors in X.A.IV.009.c.
X.E.IV.01 "Technology" for the "development", "production" or "use" of equipment 
controlled under X.A.IV.001, X.A.IV.006, X.A.IV.007, X.A.IV.008, or 
X.A.IV.009.c.
X.E.IV.02 "Technology" for the "development" or "production" of equipment, materials 
or "software" subject to authorisation in X.A.IV.002, X.A.IV.004, or 
X.A.IV.005, X.B.IV.001, X.C.IV.001, X.C.IV.002, or X.D.IV.003.
X.E.IV.03 Other 'technologies', as follows:
a. optical manufacturing technologies that allow the mass production of 
optical components with an annual production rate of more than 10 m2 
per individual spindle and having all the following characteristics
1. surface area greater than 1 m 2 ; and
2. a face curvature greater than λ/10 (rms value) at the expected 
wavelength;
b. "technology" for optical filters with a bandwidth of 10 nm or less, field 
of view greater than 40° and resolution greater than 0.75 line-
pairs/milliradians;
c. "technology" for the "development" or "production" of cameras 
subject to authorisation in X.A.IV.003;
d. "technology" required for the "development" or "production" of non-
triaxial "magnetometer" probes or non-triaxial "magnetometer" probe 
systems having one of the following characteristics
1. 'sensitivity' less (better) than 0.05 nT (rms) per square root Hz 
at frequencies below 1 Hz; or
2. 'sensitivity' less than (better than) 1 x 10 -3 nT (rms) per square 
root Hz at 1 Hz or higher;
e. "technology' 'required' for the 'development' or 'production' of devices 
for the conversion of infrared radiation into visible light having all of 
the following characteristics
1. response in the wavelength range exceeding 700 nm, but not 
exceeding 1 500 nm; and
2. a combination of infrared radiation photodetector, light-emitting 
diode (OLED) and nanocrystals to convert infrared radiation into 
visible light.
Technical note: For the purposes of X.E.IV.003, 'sensitivity' (or noise level) 
means the rms value of the device's noise floor limited to the lowest measurable 
signal.
Category V - Avionics and navigation equipment
X.A. V.001 Airborne communication equipment, all inertial navigation 
systems
for "aircraft" and other avionic equipment, including components, other than 
those specified in the Annexes to the OBDI.
Note 1: X.A.V.001 does not subject headphones or microphones to authorisation.
Note 2: X.A.V.001 does not subject goods for personal use by natural persons to 
authorisation.
X.B.V. 001Other equipment specially designed for testing, inspection or 
"production" of avionics and navigation equipment.
X.D. V.001 'Software', other than those specified in the Common Military List or in the 
Annexes to the OBDI, for the 'development', 'production' or 'use' of airborne 
navigation and communication equipment and other avionics equipment.
X.E.V.01 "Technology", other than those specified in the Common Military List or the 
Annexes to the OBDI, for the "development", "production" or "use" of 
navigation and airborne communications equipment and other avionics 
equipment.
Category VI - naval equipment
X.A.VI.01 Marine vessels, systems or equipment, and specially designed components 
therefor; components and accessories, as follows
a. underwater vision systems, as follows:
1. Television systems (comprising camera, lighting, surveillance 
and signal transmission equipment) having a limiting resolution, 
measured in air, of more than 500 lines and specially designed or 
modified to operate by remote control with submersible vehicles; 
or
2. underwater cameras with a limiting resolution, measured in 
air, greater than 700 lines;
Technical note: The limiting resolution in television is a measure of the 
horizontal resolution generally expressed as the maximum number of 
lines in relation to the height of the discriminated frame on the test 
diagram, using IEEE Standard 208/1960 or equivalent standards.
b. cameras specially designed or modified for underwater use, having a film 
format of 35 mm or larger and autofocus or remote focusing specially 
designed for underwater use;
c. stroboscopic light systems, specially designed or modified for 
underwater use, capable of light output energy in excess of 300 J per 
flash;
d. other underwater cameras, other than those specified in the 
annexes to the OBDI;
e. Marine boilers specially designed to have at least one of the 
following characteristics:
1. heat release rate (at maximum performance) equal to or greater 
than 1 966.4 kW/m3 of firebox volume; or
2. ratio of steam generated in kg/hour (at maximum performance) to 
the dry weight of the boiler in kg equal to or greater than 37.6;
f. vessels (surface or submarine), including inflatable boats, and 
specially designed components thereof, other than those specified 
in the Annexes to the OBDI;
Note: X.A.VI.001.f does not subject vessels in temporary residence used 
for private transport or transport of passengers or goods to or through 
the customs territory of the Union to authorisation.
g. marine engines (both inboard and outboard) and submarine engines, 
and specially designed components thereof, other than those specified 
in the Annexes to the OBDI;
h. other self-contained underwater breathing apparatus (diving apparatus) 
and their accessories, other than those specified in the annexes to the 
OBDI;
i. life jackets, inflation cartridges, diving compasses and diving 
computers;
Note: X.A.VI.001.i does not subject goods for the personal use of natural 
persons to authorisation.
j. underwater lights and propulsion equipment; or
Note: X.A.VI.001.j does not subject goods for the personal use of natural 
persons to authorisation.
k. air compressors and filtration systems specially designed for filling 
air cylinders.
X.D.VI.001 "Software" specially designed or modified for the "development", "production" 
or "use" of equipment controlled by X.A.VI.001.
X.D. VI.002 'Software' specially designed for the operation of unmanned submersible 
vehicles used by the oil and gas industry.
X.E.VI.01 "Technology" for the "development", "production" or "use" of the 
equipment controlled under X.A.VI.001.
Category VII - Aerospace and propulsion equipment
X.A.VII.01 Diesel engines and tractors and their specially designed components, other than 
those specified in the annexes to the OBDI:
a. Diesel engines, other than those specified in the annexes to the 
OBDI, for trucks, tractors and automotive applications, with a total 
power output of 298 kW or more;
b. off-highway wheeled tractors with a carrying capacity of 9 t and above, 
and main components and accessories, other than those specified in the 
annexes to the OBDI;
c. road tractors for semi-trailers with single or tandem rear axles 
designed for 9 t or more per axle and specially designed main 
components.
Note: X.A.VII.001.b and X.A.VII.001.c do not subject vehicles in temporary 
residence used for private transport or transport of passengers or goods to 
or through the customs territory of the Union to authorisation.
X.A.VII.02 Gas turbine engines and components, other than those specified in the Common 
Military List or the Annexes to the OBDI:
a. not used;
b. not used;
c. Aero gas turbine engines and their specially designed 
components;
d. not used;
e. Pressurised breathing devices for aircraft and specially designed 
components thereof, other than those specified in the Annexes to the 
OBDI.
X.A.VII.03 Aircraft engines, other than those specified in X.A.VII.002, in the 
Common Military List or in the Annexes to the OBDI, as follows
a. reciprocating or rotary piston engines; or
b. electric motors.
Technical Note: For the purposes of X.A.VII.003, aircraft include: aeroplanes, 
UAVs, helicopters, gyrocopters, hybrid aircraft or radio-controlled models.
X.B.VII.01 Vibration test equipment and specially designed components other than those 
specified in the annexes of the OBDI.
Note: X.B.VII.001 only makes equipment for "development" or "production" 
controlled. Does not control condition monitoring systems.
X.B.VII.02 Specially designed equipment, tools or assemblies for manufacturing or 
measuring moving vanes, fixed vanes or cast end housings of gas turbines, as 
follows
a. automated equipment using non-mechanical methods to measure 
the wall thickness of airfoils;
b. tools, fixtures or equipment for measuring 'laser', water jet or 
electrochemical machining (ECM) or electro erosive machining 
(EDM) processes controlled in 9E003.c(21);
c. equipment for ceramic core leaching;
d. equipment or tools for the manufacture of ceramic cores;
e. equipment for preparing wax models of ceramic shells;
f. equipment for casting or firing ceramic shells.
X.D.VII.001 'Software' other than those specified in the Common Military List or in the 
Annexes to the OBDI for the 'development' or 'production' of equipment 
controlled in X.A.VII.001 or X.B.VII.001.
X.D. VII.002 "Software" for the "development" or "production" of equipment controlled 
under X.A.VII.002 or X.B.VII.002.
X.E.VII.01 'Technology' other than those specified in the Common Military List or in the 
Annexes to the OBDI for the 'development', 'production' or 'use' of equipment 
controlled in X.A.VII.001 or X.B.VII.001.
X.E.VII.02 "Technology" for the "development", "production" or "use" of equipment 
controlled under X.A.VII.002 or X.B.VII.002.
X.E.VII.03 Other 'technology', not described in 9E003( 22), as follows:
a. rotor blade tip clearance control systems using active coating 
compensation 'technology' limited to a design and development 
database; or
b. gas bearings for turbine engine rotor assemblies.
21 See annexes to the OBDI.
22 See annexes to the OBDI.
Category VIII - Miscellaneous
X.A.VIII.01 Equipment for the production or exploration of petroleum, as follows:
a. measuring equipment integrated in a drill head, including inertial 
navigation systems for measurement while drilling (MWD),
Measurement While Drilling);
b. gas monitoring systems and their detectors, designed to operate and 
detect hydrogen sulphide continuously;
c. equipment for seismological measurements, including reflection 
seismics and seismic vibrators;
d. sediment echosounders.
X.A.VIII.02 Equipment, 'electronic assemblies' and components specially designed for 
quantum computers, quantum electronics, quantum sensors, quantum 
processing units, qubit circuits, qubit devices or quantum radar systems, 
including Pockels cells.
Note 1: Quantum computers perform calculations that exploit the collective 
properties of quantum states such as superposition, interference and 
entanglement.
Note 2: Units, circuits and devices include, but are not limited to, 
superconducting circuits, quantum annealing, ion traps, photonic 
interaction, silicon/spin and cold atoms.
X.A.VIII.03 Microscopes, related equipment and detectors, as follows:
a. scanning electron microscopes (SEM);
b. scanning Auger microscopes;
c. transmission electron microscopes (TEM);
d. atomic force microscopes (AFM);
e. scanning force microscopes (SFM);
f. Equipment and detectors, specially designed for use with the 
microscopes specified in X.A.VIII.003.a to X.A.VIII.0003.e, applying 
any of the following material analysis techniques
1. X-ray photoelectron spectroscopy (XPS);
2. X-ray dispersive spectroscopy (EDX, EDS); or
3. electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis (ESCA).
X.A.VIII.04 Equipment for the harvesting of metal ores in large sea beds. 
X.A.VIII.005 Fabrication equipment and machine tools as follows:
a. additive manufacturing equipment for the 'production' of metal 
parts;
Note: X.A.VIII.005.a applies only to the following systems:
1. powder bed systems using selective laser melting (SLM), 
laser cusing, direct metal laser sintering (DMLS) or electron 
beam melting (EBM); or
2. powder-fed systems using laser cladding, direct energy 
deposition or laser metal deposition.
b. additive manufacturing equipment for 'energy materials', 
including equipment using ultrasonic extrusion;
c. vat photopolymerisation (VVP) additive manufacturing equipment using 
stereolithography (SLA) or digital light processing (DLP).
X.A.VIII.06 Equipment for the 'production' of printed electronics for organic diodes
light emitters (OLEDs), organic field-effect transistors (OFETs) or organic 
photovoltaic cells (OPVCs).
X.A.VIII.07 Equipment for the 'production' of micro-electromechanical systems (MEMS) 
that exploit the mechanical properties of silicon, including sensors in the form 
of chips such as pressure membranes, bending beams or micro-control devices.
X.A.VIII.08 Specially designed equipment for the production of electrofuels and synthetic 
fuels or solar cells with very high efficiency (efficiency > 30 %).
X.A.VIII.09 Ultra High Vacuum (UHV) equipment, as follows:
a. UHV pumps (sublimation, turbomolecular, diffusion, cryogenic, ion-
getter);
b. UHV pressure gauges.
Note: UHV is defined as a pressure of 100 nanopascals (nPa) or less.
X.A.VIII.10 Cryogenic refrigeration systems' designed to maintain temperatures below 1.1 K 
for 48 hours or more and associated cryogenic refrigeration equipment, as 
follows:
a. impulse tubes;
b. cryostats;
c. dewar;
d. Gas Handling System (GHS);
e. compressors; or
f. control units.
Note: 'Cryogenic refrigeration systems' include, but are not limited to, dilution 
refrigeration, adiabatic demagnetisation chillers and laser cooling systems.
X.A.VIII.11 Decapsulation' equipment for semiconductor devices.
Note: 'Decapsulation' refers to the removal, by mechanical, thermal or chemical 
means, of a cap, cover or encapsulating material from an integrated circuit in a 
package.
X.A.VIII.12 High quantum efficiency (QE) photodetectors with QE above 80 % in the 
wavelength range above 400 nm but not exceeding 1 600 nm.
X.AVIII.013 Numerically controlled machine tools with one or more linear axes with a travel 
length exceeding 8 000 mm.
X.A.VIII.14 Riot or crowd control water cannon systems and their specially designed 
components.
Note: X.A.VIII.014 Water cannon systems include, for example: vehicles or 
stationary stations equipped with a remotely controlled water cannon designed 
to protect the operator from an outside riot and having features such as armour 
plating, shatterproof glazing, metal shields, rigid tubular bumpers or run-flat 
tyres. Specially designed components for water cannon may include, for 
example: deck cannon nozzles, pumps, tanks, camera equipment and lights 
reinforced or shielded against projectiles, elevator mounts for such products 
and remote control systems for such products.
X.A.VIII.15 Blunt weapons carried by law enforcement officers, including slappers, 
blackjacks, batons with side grips, tonfa sticks, sjamboks and other whips.
X.A.VIII.16 Police helmets and shields and specially designed components, other than those 
specified in the annexes to the OBDI.
X.A.VIII.17 Law enforcement restraint equipment, including leg irons, malleolus chains and 
handcuffs; straitjackets; ankle straps with stun function; electric shock belts; 
electric shock sleeves; restraint devices
multi-point such as restraint chairs and specially designed components and 
accessories other than those specified in the annexes of the OBDI.
Note: X.A.VIII.017 applies to restraint devices used in the course of law 
enforcement activities. Does not apply to medical devices intended to restrict 
patient movement during a medical procedure. It does not apply to devices used 
to restrain patients with memory impairment within appropriate medical 
facilities. Does not apply to safety equipment such as seat belts or child car 
seats.
X.A.VIII.18 Equipment, 'software' and data for oil and gas exploration, as follows (see list 
of items subject to authorisation)
a. not used;
b. products for hydraulic fracturing, as follows:
1. 'software' and data for the design and analysis of hydraulic 
fracturing;
2. hydraulic fracture maintenance agents' (proppants), 'fracturing 
fluids' and their chemical additives; or
3. high-pressure pumps.
Technical note:
A hydraulic fracture maintaining agent' (proppant) is a solid material, usually 
treated sand or artificial ceramic materials, designed to keep a hydraulic 
fracture open during or after fracturing treatment. It is added to the 'fracturing 
fluid', the composition of which may vary depending on the type of fracturing 
used and which may be gel-based, foam-based or slickwater.
X.A.VIII.19 Equipment for specific treatments, as follows (see list of products subject 
to authorisation):
a. ring magnets;
b. not used;
X.A.VIII.20 Weapons and devices intended for the purpose of riot control or self-defence, as 
follows:
a. portable electric shock weapons, capable of striking one person 
per discharge, including, but not limited to, batons and electric 
shock shields, rubber-bullet guns and electric stun guns (tasers);
b. Kits of all components essential for the assembly of portable electric 
shock weapons controlled by X.A.VIII.020.a; or Note: The 
following are regarded as essential components
1. the unit producing the electrical discharge;
2. the switch, remote-controlled or not; and
3. the electrodes or, if applicable, the wires over which 
the
download
electrical.
c. fixed or mountable electric shock weapons, capable of covering a large 
area and hitting several people with discharges.
X.A.VIII.21 Weapons and equipment for the dissemination of incapacitating or irritating 
chemicals for the purpose of riot control or self-defence and certain related 
substances, as follows
a. Portable weapons and equipment that administer a dose of the 
incapacitating or irritating chemical to a single person or spread a dose 
of the chemical over a restricted area, e.g. in the form of a mist or 
vaporous cloud;
Note 1: This entry does not control material subject to control under 
ML7(e) of Annex 3 OBDI.
Note 2: This item does not subject individual portable equipment, even 
when it contains a chemical, that the user carries for self-defence.
Note 3: In addition to chemicals of interest, such as chemical riot control 
agents or PAVAs, items controlled by X.A.VIII.021.c and X.A.VIII.021.d 
are considered incapacitating or irritating chemicals.
b. pelargonic acid vanillylamide (PAVA) (CAS 2444-46-4);
c. capsicum oleoresin (OC) (CAS 8023-77-6);
d. Mixtures containing at least 0.3 wt. % PAVA or OC and a solvent (e.g. 
ethanol, 1-propanol or hexane) that can be administered in the state as 
incapacitating or irritating agents, in particular in aerosol and liquid form, 
or can be used for the manufacture of incapacitating or irritating agents;
Note 1: This item does not control sauces and preparations for sauces, 
soups and preparations for soups and compound condiments, provided 
that PAVA or OC is not the only constituent flavouring.
Note 2: This item does not cover medicinal products for which a 
marketing authorisation has been granted under Union law.
e. fixed material for spreading incapacitating or irritating chemicals, 
fixed in the wall or ceiling inside a building, equipped with a cylinder 
containing incapacitating or irritating chemicals, remote-controlled; or
Note: In addition to chemicals of interest, such as chemical riot control 
agents or PAVAs, items controlled by X.A.VIII.021.c and X.A.VIII.021.d 
are considered incapacitating or irritating chemicals.
f. fixed or mountable material for spreading incapacitating or irritating 
chemicals, capable of covering a large area, not intended to be 
embedded in the wall or ceiling inside a building;
Note 1: This entry does not control material subject to control under 
ML7(e) of Annex 3 OBDI.
Note 2: In addition to chemicals of interest, such as chemical riot control 
agents or PAVAs, items controlled by X.A.VIII.021.c and X.A.VIII.021.d 
are considered incapacitating or irritating chemicals.
g. other irritant chemicals and their mixtures containing at least 0.3 % by 
weight of the active substance, as follows
1. dibenzo[b,f][1,4]oxazepine (CR) (CAS 257-07-8);
2. 8-methyl-N-vanillyl-trans-6-nonenamide (capsaicin) (CAS 404-86-
4);
3. 8-methyl-N-vanillylnonamide (dihyrocapsaicin) (CAS 19408-84-
5);
4. N-vanillyl-9-methyldec-7-(E)-enamide (homocapsaicin) (CAS 
58493-
48-4);
5. N-vanillyl-9-methyldecanamide (homodihydrocapsaicin) (CAS 
20279-06-5);
6. N-vanillyl-7-methyloctanamide (nordihydrocapsaicin) (CAS 28789-
35-
7);
7. 4-nonanolylmorpholine (MPA) (CAS 5299-64-9);
8. cis-4-acetylaminodicyclohexylmethane (CAS 37794-87-9);
9. N,N'-bis(isopropyl)ethylenediimine; or 10. N,N'-bis(tert-
butyl)ethylenediimine.
X.A.VIII.22 Products that can be used for the execution of human beings by lethal injection, 
such as
continued:
a. short- and intermediate-acting barbiturate anaesthetics, 
including but not limited to:
1. amobarbital (CAS 57-43-2);
2. amobarbital sodium salt (CAS 64-43-7);
3. pentobarbital (CAS 76-74-4);
4. pentobarbital sodium salt (CAS 57-33-0);
5. secobarbital (CAS 76-73-3);
6. secobarbital sodium salt (CAS 309-43-3);
7. thiopental (CAS 76-75-5); or
8. thiopental sodium salt (CAS 71-73-8), also called thiopentone 
sodium;
b. products containing one of the anaesthetics listed in X.A.VIII.022.a.
X.A.VIII.23 Nets, outdoor pavilions/canopies, tents, blankets and clothing, specially 
designed for camouflage.
X.A. VIII.024 'All-terrain vehicles' ('ATVs').
Technical note:
All-terrain vehicles are motor vehicles designed to travel on three or four tyres 
at low pressure (relative pressure less than 0.9 bar) on unpaved surfaces, 
generally equipped with a seat on which the operator sits astride and 
handlebars for steering. Allterrain vehicles may include, for example, 
quads, all-terrain vehicles and UTVs (Utility Terrain Vehicles).
X.B.VIII.01 Equipment for specific treatments, as follows (see list of products subject 
to authorisation):
a. hot cells; or
b. gloveboxes suitable for use with radioactive materials.
X.C.VIII.01 Metal and metal alloy powders, usable for one of the systems listed in 
X.A.VIII.005.a.
X.C.VIII.02 Advanced materials, as follows:
a. materials for cloaking or adaptive camouflage;
b. metamaterials, e.g. with a negative refractive index;
c. not used;
d. high entropy alloys (HEA);
e. Heusler compounds; or
f. Kitaev's materials, including Kitaev's spin liquids.
X.C.VIII.03 Conjugated polymers (conductors, semiconductors, electroluminescent) for 
printed or organic electronics.
X.C.VIII.04 Energy materials, as follows, and their mixtures:
a. ammonium picrate (CAS 131-74-8);
b. black powder;
c. hexanitrodiphenylamine (CAS 131-73-7);
d. difluoroamine (CAS 10405-27-3);
e. nitroamido (CAS 9056-38-6);
f. not used;
g. tetranitronaphthalin;
h. trinitroanisole;
i. trinitronaphthalin;
j. trinitroxylene;
k. N-pyrrolidinone; 1-methyl-2-pyrrolidinone (CAS 872-50-4);
l. diothymaleate (CAS 142-16-5);
m. ethylhexylacrylate (CAS 103-11-7);
n. triethylaluminium (TEA) (CAS 97-93-8), trimethylaluminium (TMA) 
(CAS 75- 241) and other pyrophoric metal alkyls and aryls of lithium, 
sodium, magnesium, zinc and boron;
o. nitrocellulose (CAS 9004-70-0);
p. nitroglycerin (or glycerin trinitrate, trinitroglycerin) (NG) 
(CAS 55-63-0);
q. 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT) (CAS 118-96-7);
r. ethylenediaminodinitrate (EDDN) (CAS 20829-66-7);
s. pentaerythritetranitrate (PETN) (CAS 78-11-5);
t. lead azide (CAS 13424-46-9), normal lead styphnate (CAS 15245-44-0) 
and basic lead styphnate (CAS 12403-82-6) and primary explosives or 
initiating compositions containing azides or azide complexes;
u. not used;
v. not used;
w. diethyldiphenylurea (CAS 85-98-3); dimethyldiphenylurea (CAS 
611-92-7); methyldiphenylurea;
x. N,N-diphenylurea (asymmetric diphenylurea) (CAS 603-54-3);
y. methyl-N,N-diphenylurea (asymmetric methyl 
diphenylurea) (CAS 13114-72-2);
z. ethyl-N,N-diphenylurea (asymmetrical ethyl 
diphenylurea) (CAS 64544-71-4); aa. not used; bb. 
4-
nitrodiphenylamine (4-NDPA) (CAS 836-30-6); 2,2- 
dinitropropanol (CAS 918-52-5); or dd. not used.
X.D.VIII.01 "Software" specially designed for the "development", "production" or 
"use" of the equipment specified in X.A.VIII.005 to X.A.VIII.0013.
X.D.VIII.02 "Software" specially designed for the "development", "production" or "use" of 
the equipment, "electronic assemblies" or components specified in 
X.A.VIII.002.
X.D.VIII.03 "Software" for digital twins of additive manufacturing products or for 
determining the reliability of additive manufacturing products.
X.D.VIII.04 "Software" specially designed for the "development", "production" or 
"use" of goods controlled under X.A.VIII.014.
X.D.VIII.05 "Specific 'Software', as follows (see list of items subject to 
authorisation):
a. 'software' for neutron calculations/modelling;
b. 'software' for radiation transport calculations/modelling; or
c. "software' for hydrodynamic calculations/modelling.
X.E.VIII.01 "Technology" for the "development", "production" or "use" of 
equipment specified in X.A.VIII.001. to X.A.VIII.0013.
X.E.VIII.02 "Technology" for the "development", "production" or "utilisation" of materials
specified in X.C.VIII.002. or X.C.VIII.003.
X.E.VIII.03 "Technology" for digital twins of additive manufacturing products, for 
determining the reliability of additive manufacturing products or for 
"software" specified in X.D.VIII.003.
X.E.VIII.04 "Technology" for the "development", "production" or "use" of "software" 
specified in X.D.VIII.001 and X.D.VIII.002.
X.E.VIII.05 "Technology" "required" for the "development" or "production" of goods 
controlled under X.A.VIII.014.
X.E.VIII.06 "Technology" exclusively for the "development" or "production" of 
equipment controlled under X.A.VIII.017.
Category IX - Special materials and related equipment
X.A.IX.01 Chemical agents, including tear gas formulations containing 1 % or less ortho-
chlorobenzalmalononitrile (CS) or 1 % or less chloroacetophenone (CN), except 
when in individual containers with a net weight of 20 g or less chilli liquid, 
except when packed in individual containers with a net weight of 85,05 g or 
less; smoke bombs; signal flares, canisters, grenades and charges of smokeless 
type; and other pyrotechnic articles with dual military or commercial use, and 
specially designed components therefor, other than those specified in the 
Annexes to the OBDI.
X.A.IX.02 Fingerprinting powders, dyes and inks.
X.A.IX.03 Protective and detection equipment not specially designed for military use and 
not controlled by 1A004 or 2B351(23), as follows (see list of controlled items), 
and components therefor not specially designed for military use and not 
controlled
in 1A004 or 2B351:
23 See annexes to the OBDI.
a. dosimeters for monitoring radiation absorbed by persons; or
b. equipment exclusively intended, by design or application, for 
protection against specific risks associated with civil industrial 
activities in the mining, agricultural, pharmaceutical, medical, 
veterinary, environmental, waste management and food sectors.
Note: X.A.IX.003 does not control products for protection against chemical or 
biological agents that are consumer goods, packaged for retail or personal use, 
or medical products, such as latex examination gloves, latex surgical gloves, 
liquid disinfectant soap, disposable surgical drapes, surgical gowns, surgical 
shoe covers and surgical masks.
X.A.IX.04 Specific processing equipment, other than those specified in the Common 
Military List or the Annexes to the OBDI, as follows (see list of items subject 
to authorisation)
a. radiation detection, monitoring and measurement equipment other 
than that specified in the Annexes to the OBDI; or
b. X-ray detection equipment, such as X-ray converters, and phosphor 
storage plates.
X.B.IX.01 Specific processing equipment, other than those specified in the Common 
Military List or the Annexes to the OBDI, as follows (see list of items subject 
to authorisation)
a. electrolytic cells for fluorine production, other than those specified in 
the annexes of the OBDI;
b. particle accelerators;
c. industrial process control hardware/systems designed for power 
generation industries, other than those specified in the annexes of the 
OBDI;
d. Freon and chilled water cooling systems capable of maintaining 
constant cooling of 29.3 kW/hour or more; or
e. equipment for the production of structural composites, fibres, 
prepregs and preforms.
X.C.IX.01 Compounds of defined chemical constitution presented in isolation according 
to Note 1 to Chapters 28 and 29 of the Combined Nomenclature:
a. in concentrations equal to or greater than 95 % by weight, as follows:
1. ethylene dichloride (CAS 107-06-2);
2. nitromethane (CAS RN 75-52-5);
3. picric acid (CAS 88-89-1);
4. aluminium chloride (CAS 7446-70-0);
5. arsenic (CAS 7440-38-2);
6. arsenic trioxide (CAS 1327-53-3);
7. bis(2-chloroethyl)ethylamine hydrochloride (CAS 3590-07-6);
8. bis(2-chloroethyl)methylamine hydrochloride (CAS 55-86-7);
9. tris(2-chloroethyl)amine hydrochloride (CAS 817-09-4);
10. tributylphosphite (CAS 102-85-2);
11. methyl isocyanate (CAS 624-83-9);
12. quinaldine (CAS 91-63-4);
13. 1-bromo-2-chloroethane (CAS 107-04-0);
14. benzyl (CAS 134-81-6);
15. diethyl ether (CAS 60-29-7);
16. dimethyl ether (CAS 115-10-6);
17. dimethylaminoethanol (CAS 108-01-0);
18. 2-methoxyethanol (CAS 109-86-4);
19. butyryl cholinesterase (BCHE);
20. diethylenetriamine (CAS 111-40-0);
21. dichloromethane (CAS 75-09-2);
22. dimethylaniline (CAS 121-69-7);
23. ethyl bromide (CAS 74-96-4);
24. ethyl chloride (CAS 75-00-3);
25. ethylamine (CAS 75-04-7);
26. hexamine (CAS 100-97-0);
27. isopropanol (CAS 67-63-0);
28. 2-bromopropane (CAS 75-26-3);
29. diisopropyl ether (CAS 108-20-3);
30. methylamine (CAS 74-89-5);
31. methyl bromide (CAS 74-83-9);
32. monoisopropylamine (CAS 75-31-0);
33. obidoxin chloride (CAS 114-90-9);
34. potassium bromide (CAS 7758-02-3);
35. pyridine (CAS 110-86-1);
36. pyridostigmine bromide (CAS 101-26-8);
37. sodium bromide (CAS 7647-15-6);
38. sodium metal (CAS 7440-23-5);
39. tributylamine (CAS 102-82-9);
40. triethylamine (CAS 121-44-8); or
41. trimethylamine (CAS 75-50-3);
b. in concentrations equal to or greater than 90 % by weight, as follows:
1. acetone (CAS 67-64-1);
2. acetylene (CAS 74-86-2);
3. ammonia (CAS 7664-41-7);
4. antimony (CAS 7440-36-0);
5. benzaldehyde (CAS 100-52-7);
6. benzoin (CAS 119-53-9);
7. 1-butanol (CAS 71-36-3);
8. 2-butanol (CAS 78-92-2);
9. isobutanol (CAS 78-83-1);
10. tert-butanol (CAS 75-65-0);
11. calcium carbide (CAS 75-20-7);
12. carbon monoxide (CAS 630-08-0);
13. chlorine (CAS 7782-50-5);
14. cyclohexanol (CAS 108-93-0);
15. dicyclohexylamine (CAS 101-83-7);
16. ethanol (CAS 64-17-5);
17. ethylene (CAS 74-85-1);
18. ethylene oxide (CAS 75-21-8);
19. fluoroapatite (CAS 1306-05-4);
20. hydrogen chloride (CAS 7647-01-0);
21. hydrogen sulphide (CAS 7783-06-4);
22. mandelic acid (CAS 90-64-2);
23. methanol (CAS 67-56-1);
24. methyl chloride (CAS 74-87-3);
25. methyl iodide (CAS 74-88-4);
26. methylmercaptan (CAS 74-93-1);
27. monoethylene glycol (CAS 107-21-1);
28. oxalyl chloride (CAS 79-37-8);
29. potassium sulphide (CAS 1312-73-8);
30. potassium thiocyanate (CAS 333-20-0);
31. sodium hypochlorite (CAS 7681-52-9);
32. sulphur (CAS 7704-34-9);
33. sulphur dioxide (CAS 7446-09-5);
34. sulphur trioxide (CAS 7446-11-9);
35. thiophosphoryl chloride (CAS 3982-91-0);
36. triisobutyl phosphite (CAS 1606-96-8);
37. white phosphorus (CAS 12185-10-3);
38. yellow phosphorus (CAS 7723-14-0);
39. mercury (CAS 7439-97-6);
40. barium chloride (CAS 10361-37-2);
41. sulphuric acid (CAS 7664-93-9);
42. 3,3-dimethyl-1-butene (CAS 558-37-2);
43. 2,2-dimethylpropanal (CAS 630-19-3);
44. 2,2-dimethylpropylchloride (CAS 753-89-9);
45. 2-methylbutene (CAS 26760-64-5);
46. 2-chloro-3-methylbutane (CAS 631-65-2);
47. 2,3-dimethyl-2,3-butanediol (CAS 76-09-5);
48. 2-methyl-2-butene (CAS 513-35-9);
49. butyllithium (CAS 109-72-8);
50. bromine(methyl)magnesium (CAS 75-16-1);
51. formaldehyde (CAS 50-00-0);
52. diethanolamine (CAS 111-42-2);
53. dimethyl carbonate (CAS 616-38-6);
54. metholdiethanolamine hydrochloride (CAS 54060-15-0);
55. diethylamine hydrochloride (CAS 660-68-4);
56. diisopropylamine hydrochloride (CAS 819-79-4);
57. 3-quinuclidinone hydrochloride (CAS 1193-65-3);
58. 3-quinuclidinol hydrochloride (CAS 6238-13-7);
59. (R)-3-quinuclidinol hydrochloride (CAS 42437-96-7);
60. N,N-diethylaminoethanol hydrochloride (CAS 14426-20-1);
61. dialkyl chlorophosphates (≤ C10);
62. dialkyl fluorophosphates (≤ C10);
63. N,N-methylisopropylacetamidine (CAS 1339185-57-7);
64. N,N-methylethylacetamidine (CAS 1339632-40-4);
65. N,N-Ethylisopropylacetamidine (CAS 1339156-10-3);
66. N,N-methylpropylacetamidine (CAS 1344238-28-3);
67. N,N-Ethylpropylacetamidine (CAS 1339737-43-7);
68. N,N-isopropylpropylacetamidine (CAS 1341389-98-7);
69. N,N-methylethylpropanamidine (CAS 1339424-26-8);
70. N,N-Ethylisopropylpropanamidine (CAS 1344354-09-1);
71. N,N-methylpropanamidine (CAS 1340216-25-2);
72. N,N-Ethylpropanamidine (CAS 1341493-60-4);
73. N,N-isopropylpropanamidine (CAS 1343225-93-3);
74. N,N-methylpropanamidine (CAS 1339042-55-5);
75. N,N-methylethylbutanamidine (CAS 1341049-51-1);
76. N,N-methylpropylbutanamidine (CAS 1343721-02-7);
77. N,N-Ethylpropylbutanamidine (CAS 1343806-12-1);
78. N,N-isopropylpropylbutanamidine (CAS 1343316-02-8);
79. N,N-methylisopropylbutanamidine (CAS 1340219-94-4);
80. N,N-Ethylisopropylbutanamidine (CAS 1342204-10-7);
81. N,N-methylethylisobutanamidine (CAS 1342365-47-2);
82. N,N-Ethylpropylisobutanamidine (CAS 1342566-58-8);
83. N,N-methylpropylisobutanamidine (CAS 1342270-21-6);
84. N,N-isopropylpropylisobutanamidine (CAS 1342156-11-9);
85. N,N-methylisopropylisobutanamidine (CAS 1341992-96-8);
86. N,N-ethylisopropylisobutanamidine (CAS 1339048-76-8);
87. N,N-dimethylacetamidine bromide (CAS 1801188-12-4);
88. N,N-dimethylacetamidine hydrochloride (CAS 2909-15-1);
89. N,N-diethylacetamidine hydrochloride (CAS 91400-32-7);
90. N,N-diethylacetamidine bromide (CAS 78053-54-0);
91. N,N-dimethylpropanamidine dichlorhydrate (CAS 79972-
73-9); or 92. N,N-dimethylpropanamidine hydrochloride 
(CAS 56776-15-9).
X.C.IX.02 Fentanyl and its derivatives Alfentanil, Sufentanil, Remifentanil, Carfentanil 
and salts thereof.
Note: X.C.IX.002 does not control goods identified as consumer goods 
packaged for retail sale for personal use or packaged for individual use.
X.C.IX.03 Chemical precursors of chemicals that act on the central nervous system, 
as follows:
a. 4-anilino-N-phenethylpiperidine (CAS 21409-26-7); or
b. N-phenethyl-4-piperidinone (CAS 39742-60-4).
Notes:
1. X.C.IX.003 does not control "chemical mixtures" containing one or more 
of the chemicals specified in X.C.IX.003. where no individually specified 
chemical constitutes more than 1 % by weight of the mixture.
2. X.C.IX.003 does not subject goods identified as consumer goods 
packaged for retail sale for personal use or packaged for individual use 
to authorisation.
X.C.IX.04 Fibrous and filamentary materials, not subject to authorisation in 1C010
or 1C210(24), intended for use in 'composite' structures, with a specific 
modulus of 3.18 x 106 m or more and specific tensile strength of 7.62 x 
104 m or more.
24 See annexes to the OBDI.
X.C.IX.05 'Vaccines', 'immunotoxins', 'medical products', 'diagnostic and food test kits', as 
follows (see list of products subject to authorisation)
a. 'vaccines' containing, or designed for use against, products licensed under 
1C351, 1C353 or 1C354;
b. "immunotoxins" containing the goods controlled by 1C351.d; or
c. 'medical products' containing:
1. "toxins" controlled under 1C351.d (except botulinum toxins 
controlled under 1C351.d.1, conotoxins controlled under 
1C351.d.3 or products controlled under 1C351.d.4 or .d.5); or
2. genetically modified organisms or genetic elements subject to 
authorisation in 1C353.a.3 (except those containing or encoding 
Botulinum toxins subject to authorisation in 1C351.d.1 or 
conotoxins subject to authorisation in 1C351.d.3);
d. 'medical products' not subject to authorisation in X.C.IX.005.c 
containing:
1. Botulinum toxins licensed in 1C351.d.1; or
2. conotoxins subject to authorisation in 1C351.d.3; or
3. genetically modified organisms or genetic elements controlled 
under 1C353.a.3 which contain or encode Botulinum toxins 
controlled under 1C351.d.1 or conotoxins controlled under 
1C351.d.3; or
e. 'Diagnostic and food test kits' containing items controlled under 
1C351.d (except items controlled under 1C351.d.4 or .d.5).
Technical notes:
1. Medical products' are: 1) pharmaceutical formulations intended for 
testing and administration to humans (or animals) in the context of 
medical treatments, 2) pre-packaged for distribution as clinical or 
medical products, and 3) approved by the European Medicines Agency 
(EMA) for marketing as clinical or medical products or for use as a 
new research drug.
2. Diagnostic and food test kits' are specially developed, packaged and 
marketed for diagnostic or public health purposes. Biological toxins in 
any other configuration, including bulk shipments, or for any other 
end use are subject to authorisation in 1C351.
X.C.IX.06 Charges and commercial devices containing energetic materials, other than 
those specified in the Annexes to the OBDI, and nitrogen trifluoride in 
gaseous state
(see list of products subject to authorisation):
a. Hollow charges specially designed for oil well operations, which use a 
charge operating along a single axis, which produce a hole when 
detonated:
1. contain any formulation of 'materials subject to 
authorisation';
2. have a uniform conical coating with an opening angle of 90 
degrees or less;
3. contain an amount of 'material subject to authorisation' greater 
than 0.010 kg but less than or equal to 0.090 kg; and
4. have a diameter of 114.3 cm or less;
b. Hollow charges specially designed for operations in oil wells that 
contain an amount of 'licensed materials' less than or equal to 0.010 
kg;
c. detonating cord or shockwave tubes containing an amount of 
'materials subject to authorisation' less than or equal to 0.064 kg/m;
d. cartridge devices containing an amount of 'materials subject to 
authorisation' less than or equal to 0.70 kg in the deflagration material;
e. detonators (electrical or non-electrical) and assemblies thereof 
containing a quantity of 'materials subject to authorisation' less than or 
equal to 0.01 kg;
f. ignitors that contain an amount of 'material subject to 
authorisation' less than or equal to 0.01 kg;
g. oil well cartridges containing an amount of 'energy materials' less 
than or equal to 0.015 kg;
h. commercial cast or compressed reinforcing fillers (boosters) that 
contain an amount of 'controlled materials' less than or equal to 1.0 kg;
i. liquid slurries and prefabricated commercial emulsions containing a 
quantity of 'materials subject to authorisation' in ML8 less than or equal 
to
10.0 kg and less than or equal to 35 % by weight;
j. cutting charges and cutting tools that contain a quantity of 
'materials subject to authorisation' less than or equal to 3.5 kg;
k. pyrotechnic devices designed exclusively for commercial purposes 
(e.g.
theatrical performances, cinematic special effects and pyrotechnics) that 
contain a quantity of 'materials subject to authorisation' less than or 
equal to 3.0 kg;
l. Other explosive devices and commercial charges not controlled under 
X.C.IX.006.a-k containing 1.0 kg or less of 'controlled materials'; or
Note: X.C.IX.006.l includes automotive safety devices; fire extinguisher 
systems; cartridges for nail guns; explosive charges for agricultural, oil 
and gas operations, sporting goods, commercial mining or public works; 
and retardant tubes used in the assembly of commercial explosive devices.
m. nitrogen trifluoride ( NF3) in the gaseous state.
Notes:
1. Authorised materials' are defined as energy materials subject to 
authorisation (see 1C011, 1C111, 1C239 or ML8).
2. Non-gaseous nitrogen trifluoride is controlled under ML8.d of the 
Common Military List.
X.C.IX.07 Mixtures not controlled in 1C350 or 1C450( 25) containing chemicals controlled 
by 1C350 or 1C450 as well as medical, analytical, diagnostic and food test kits 
not controlled by 1C350 or 1C450 containing chemicals controlled by 1C350, as 
follows (see list of controlled items)
a. mixtures containing the following concentrations of precursor chemicals 
subject to authorisation in 1C350:
25 See annexes to the OBDI.
1. mixtures containing 10 % by weight or less of any chemical 
listed in Table 2 of the Chemical Weapons Convention subject 
to authorisation in 1C350;
2. mixtures containing less than 30 % by weight of:
a. any chemical listed in Table 3 of the Chemical Weapons 
Convention subject to authorisation in 1C350; or
b. any chemical precursor not covered by the Chemical 
Weapons Convention subject to authorisation in 1C350;
b. mixtures containing the following concentrations of toxic chemicals or 
chemical precursors subject to authorisation in 1C450:
1. mixtures containing the following concentrations of chemicals 
listed in Table 2 of the Chemical Weapons Convention subject to 
authorisation in 1C450:
a. mixtures containing 1 % by weight or less of any chemical 
listed in Table 2 of the Chemical Weapons Convention 
controlled under 1C450.a.1 and a.2 (i.e. mixtures 
containing Amiton or PFIB); or
b. mixtures containing 10 % by weight or less of any 
chemical listed in Table 2 of the Chemical Weapons 
Convention controlled under 1C450.b.1, b.2, b.3, b.4, b.5 
or b.6;
2. mixtures containing less than 30 % by weight of any chemical 
listed in Table 3 of the Chemical Weapons Convention controlled 
by 1C450.a.4., a.5., a.6., a.7. or 1C450.b.8;
c. 'Medical, analytical, diagnostic and food-testing kits' containing chemical 
precursors licensed in 1C350 in quantities not exceeding 300 g per 
chemical.
Technical note:
For the purpose of this item, 'medical, analytical, diagnostic and food test kits' 
means pre-packaged materials of defined composition especially developed, 
packaged and marketed for medical, analytical, diagnostic or public health 
purposes. Replacement reagents for medical, analytical, diagnostic and food 
test kits described in X.C.IX.007.c. are controlled under 1C350 if they contain 
at least one of the chemical precursors identified therein in concentrations 
equal to or greater than the control levels for the mixtures specified in 1C350.
X.C.IX.08 Non-fluorinated polymeric substances not controlled by 1C008( 26), as follows 
(see list of controlled products):
a. polyarylene ether ketones, as follows:
1. polyether ether ketone (PEEK);
2. polyether ketone ketone (PEKK);
3. polyether ketone (PEK); or
4. polyether ketone ether ketone (PEKEKK);
b. not used;
X.C.IX.09 Specific materials, other than those specified in the Common Military List or the 
Annexes to the OBDI, as follows (see list of items subject to authorisation)
a. precision ball bearings made of hardened steel and tungsten carbide
26 See annexes to the OBDI.
(diameter of 3 mm or more);
b. 304 and 316 stainless steel plates other than those specified in the 
annexes of the OBDI;
c. monel sheets;
d. tributylphosphate (CAS 126-73-8);
e. nitric acid (CAS 7697-37-2) in concentrations of 20 wt. % or more;
f. fluorine (CAS 7782-41-4); or
g. alpha emitting radionuclides other than those specified in the 
annexes of the OBDI.
X.C.IX.10 Aromatic polyamides (aramids) not controlled under 1C010, 1C210 or 
X.C.IX.004, presented in any of the following forms (see list of controlled 
goods)
a. primary forms;
b. yarns or monofilaments;
c. bundles of filaments;
d. fibre bundles;
e. staple or chopped fibres;
f. fabrics;
g. pasta or borre.
X.C.IX.11 Nanomaterials, as follows (see list of products subject to authorisation):
a. semiconductor nanomaterials;
b. composite-based nanomaterials; or
c. any of the following carbon-based nanomaterials:
1. carbon nanotubes;
2. carbon nanofibres;
3. fullerenes;
4. graphenes; or
5. concentric spherical carbon nanoparticles (onions).
Notes: For the purposes of X.C.IX.011, nanomaterial means a material that meets 
at least one of the following criteria:
1. consists of particles having one or more external dimensions 
between 1 nm and 100 nm for more than 1 % of the number size 
distribution;
2. has internal or surface structures with one or more dimensions 
between 1 nm and 100 nm; or
3. has a specific surface area by volume greater than 60 m /cm 23 , 
excluding materials consisting of particles smaller than 1 nm.
X.C.IX.12 Rare earth metals and their compounds, in organic or inorganic form, 
including mixtures, whether or not mixed or alloyed with each other.
Note 1: Rare earth metals and their compounds include scandium, yttrium, 
lanthanum, cerium, praseodymium, neodymium, promethium, samarium, 
europium, gadolinium, terbium, dysprosium, holmium, erbium, thulium, 
ytterbium and lutetium.
Note 2: Ores containing rare earth metals are excluded from the control 
provided for in Section X.C.IX.012.
Note 3: X.C.IX.012 does not control mixtures in which no metal or compound 
specified therein constitutes more than 5 % by weight of the mixture.
X.C.IX.13 Tungsten, tungsten carbide and tungsten alloys, not controlled by 1C117 or 
1C226(27), containing more than 90 % tungsten by weight.
Note 1: For the purposes of the authorisation in X.C.IX.013, wires are excluded.
Note 2: For the purposes of the authorisation in X.C.IX.013, medical or 
surgical instruments are excluded.
X.C.IX.14 Lithium and lithium compounds, as follows:
a. lithium (CAS 7439-93-2);
b. lithium carbonate (CAS 554-13-2);
c. lithium hydroxide (CAS 1310-65-2 and CAS 1310-66-3);
d. lithium oxide (CAS 12057-24-8);
e. lithium cobalt oxide (CAS 12190-79-3);
f. lithium iron phosphate (CAS 15365-14-7);
g. lithium manganese oxide (CAS 12057-17-9);
h. lithium nickel manganese cobalt oxide (CAS 346417-97-8); or
i. lithium titanate (CAS 12031-82-2).
X.C.IX.15 Ultra high molecular weight polyethylene (UHMWPE), not controlled in 
1C010 or 1C210(28), presented in one of the following forms
a. primary forms;
b. yarns or monofilaments;
27 See annexes to the OBDI.
28 See annexes to the OBDI.
c. bundles of filaments;
d. fibre bundles;
e. staple or chopped fibres;
f. fabrics;
g. pasta or borre.
X.D.IX.01 "Specific 'software', other than those specified in the Common Military List or 
the Annexes to the OBDI, as follows (see list of items subject to authorisation)
a. "software" specially designed for hardware/systems for controlling 
industrial processes subject to authorisation in X.B.IX.001, other than 
that specified in the Annexes to the OBDI; or
b. "software" specially designed for equipment for the production of 
structural composites, fibres, prepregs and preforms subject to 
authorisation in X.B.IX.001, other than those specified in the Annexes to 
the OBDI.
X.E.IX.01 "Technology" for the "development", "production" or "use" of fibrous and 
filamentary materials subject to authorisation in X.C.IX.004 and 
X.C.IX.010.
X.E.IX.02 "Technology" for the "development", "production" or "use" of nanomaterials 
subject to authorisation in X.C.IX.011.
Category X - Treatment and processing of materials
X.A.X.01 Equipment for detecting explosives or detonators, in trace and sensitive 
quantities, consisting of an automatic device or combination of devices capable 
of applying an automated decision-making process to detect the presence of 
various types of explosives, explosives or detonator residues, and components, 
other than those specified in the Annexes to the OBDI:
a. explosives detection equipment capable of applying 'automated decision 
making' to detect and identify explosives in sensitive quantities, using, 
but not limited to, X-ray (e.g., computed tomography, dual energy or 
coherent scattering), nuclear (e.g., thermoneutron analysis, fast pulse 
neutron analysis - PFNA, fast pulse neutron transmission spectroscopy 
and gamma resonance absorption) or electromagnetic (e.g., quadrupole 
resonance and dielectrometry) techniques;
b. not used;
c. Detection equipment capable of applying automated decision making to 
detect and identify initiating devices (e.g. detonators) using, but not 
limited to, X-ray (e.g. dual energy or computed tomography) or 
electromagnetic techniques.
Note: Equipment for detecting explosives or detonators referred to in X.A.X.001 
includes equipment for checking persons, documents, baggage, other personal 
effects, goods and/or correspondence.
Technical notes:
1. Automated decision-making' is the ability of the equipment to detect 
explosives or detonators at the sensitivity level selected at the design 
stage or by the operator and to issue an automated alarm signal when it 
detects explosives or detonators at or above that level.
2. This item does not control equipment that relies on operator 
interpretation of indicators such as colour mapping 
(inorganic/organic) of the product(s) being scanned.
3. Explosives and detonators include commercial charges and devices 
controlled under X.C.VIII.004 and X.C.IX.006 and energetic materials 
controlled under 1C011, 1C111 and 1C239(29).
X.A.X.02 Hidden object detection equipment operating in the frequency range of 30 GHz 
to 3 000 GHz and with a spatial resolution of 0.1 mrad (milliradian) to 1 mrad 
(milliradian) inclusive at a distance of 100 m, and components, other than those 
specified in the Annexes to the OBDI.
Note: Equipment for detecting concealed objects includes, but is not limited to, 
equipment for checking persons, documents, luggage, other personal effects, 
goods and/or correspondence.
Technical note:
The frequency range generally includes the millimetre-wave, 
submillimetre-wave and terahertz regions.
X.A.X.03 Bearings and bearing systems not controlled under 2A001 (see list of 
controlled items):
a. ball bearings or solid ball bearings having tolerances specified by the 
manufacturer in accordance with ABEC 7, ABEC 7P or ABEC 7T or 
ISO standard class 4 or better (or equivalent standards) and having any of 
the following characteristics
1. manufactured for use at operating temperatures above 573 K (300 
°C) using special materials or special heat treatments; or
2. with lubricating elements or component modifications that, 
according to the manufacturer's specifications, are specially 
designed to enable the bearings to operate at speeds in excess of 
2.3 mils
29 See annexes to the OBDI.
DN';
b. solid tapered roller bearings, having tolerances specified by the 
manufacturer in accordance with ANSI/AFBMA class 00 (inch) or 
class A (metric) or better (or equivalent standards) and having one of 
the following characteristics
1. with lubricating elements or component modifications 
that, according to the manufacturer's specifications, are 
specially designed to enable the bearings to operate at 
speeds in excess of 2.3 mils
'DN'; or
2. manufactured for use at operating temperatures below 219 K
(-54 °C) or above 423 K (150 °C);
c. gas-foil lubricated bearings manufactured for use at operating 
temperatures of 561 K (288 °C) or higher and with a unit load 
capacity of more than 1 MPa;
d. active magnetic bearing systems;
e. self-aligning fabric seal bearings or sliding bearings with fabric seal 
manufactured for use at operating temperatures below 219 K (-54 °C) or 
above 423 K (150 °C).
Technical notes:
1. DN' represents the product of the bearing bore diameter in mm and the 
bearing rotation speed in rpm.
2. Operating temperatures include temperatures obtained after the 
shutdown of a gas turbine engine.
X.A.X.04 Pipes, fittings and valves made of or lined with stainless steel, copper-nickel 
alloy steel or other alloy steels containing 10 % or more nickel and/or chromium:
a. pipes , hoses and pressure accessories with an internal diameter of 200 
mm or more and suitable for operating at pressures of 3.4 MPa or more;
b. pipe valves having all of the following characteristics, not subject to 
authorisation in 2B350.g(30):
1. pipe connection with an internal diameter of 200 mm or 
more; and
2. pressure rating of 10.3 MPa or more.
Notes:
1. See X.D.X.005 for "software" for items subject to authorisation 
under this heading.
2. See 2E001 ("development"), 2E002 ("production") and X.E.X.003 ("use") 
for technology for items controlled in this item.
3. See related authorisations in 2A226, 2B350 and X.B.X.010.
X.A.X.05 Pumps designed to move molten metals by electromagnetic forces.
Notes:
1. See X.D.X.005 for "software" for items subject to authorisation 
under this heading.
2. See 2E001 ("development"), 2E002 ("production") and X.E.X.003 ("use") 
for technology for items controlled in this item.
30 See annexes to the OBDI.
3. Pumps for use in liquid-cooled reactors are subject to authorisation in 
0A001.
X.A.X.06 Portable electric generators' and specially designed components.
Technical note:
'Portable electric generators': the generators in X.A.X.006 are portable (2,268 kg 
or less on wheels or transportable on a 2.5 tonne truck without the need for 
special measures).
X.A.X.07 Specific processing equipment, other than those specified in the Common 
Military List or the Annexes to the OBDI, as follows (see list of items subject 
to authorisation)
a. valves with bellows seal;
b. not used.
X.B.X.01 Continuous flow reactors' and their 'modular components'.
Technical notes:
1. For the purposes of X.B.X.001, 'continuous flow reactors' are 'plug 
and play' (ready-to-use) systems in which reagents are fed 
continuously into the reactor and the resulting product is collected at 
the outlet.
2. For the purpose of X.B.X.001, 'modular components' means fluid 
modules, liquid pumps, valves, packed-bed modules, mixer modules, 
pressure gauges, liquid-liquid separators, etc.
X.B.X.02 Nucleic acid assemblers and synthesisers not controlled by 2B352.i, partially 
or fully automated, designed for the generation of nucleic acids with more 
than 50 bases.
X.B.X.03 Automatic peptide synthesisers capable of operating in a controlled atmosphere.
X.B.X.04 Numerical control units for machine tools and 'numerically controlled' machine 
tools, other than those specified in the annexes to the OBDI, as follows (see 
list of items subject to authorisation)
a. numerical control' units for machine tools:
1. with four interpolating axes that can be coordinated 
simultaneously for contouring control; or
2. with two or more axes that can be co-ordinated simultaneously 
for contouring control and a minimum programmable 
increment less (better) than 0.001 mm;
3. numerical control' units for machine tools with two, three or 
four interpolating axes that can be co-ordinated 
simultaneously for contouring control, and capable of 
receiving directly (on-line) and processing computer-aided 
design (CAD) data for internal preparation of machine 
instructions; or
b. Motion control boards specially designed for machine tools and having 
at least one of the following characteristics:
1. interpolation of more than four axes;
2. ability to process real-time data to modify tool trajectory, feed rate 
and spindle data, during the machining operation, by means of
a. automatic calculation and modification of part program 
data for machining on two or more axes by means of 
measuring cycles and access to source data; or
b. adaptive control with more than one physical variable 
measured and processed by means of a calculation model 
(strategy) for
modify one or more processing instructions in order to 
optimise the process; or
3. ability to receive and process CAD data for internal 
preparation of machine instructions;
c. Numerically controlled' machine tools which, in accordance with the 
manufacturer's technical specifications, can be equipped with electronic 
devices for simultaneous contouring control on two or more axes and 
which have both of the following characteristics
1. two or more axes that can be coordinated simultaneously for 
contouring control; and
2. Positioning accuracy according to ISO 230/2 (2006), with all 
compensations available;
a. better than 15 μm on any of the linear axes (global 
positioning) for grinding machines;
b. better than 15 μm on any of the linear axes 
(global positioning) for milling machines; or
c. better than 15 μm on any of the linear axes (global 
positioning) for turning machines; or
d. machine tools for removing or cutting metals, ceramics or 
composite materials, as follows, which, in accordance with the 
manufacturer's technical specifications, can be equipped with 
electronic devices for simultaneous contouring control on two or 
more axes:
1. machine tools for turning, grinding, milling or any combination 
thereof, having two or more axes that can be coordinated 
simultaneously for contouring control and having at least one of 
the following characteristics
a. one or more contouring 'tilting spindles';
Note: X.B.X.004.d.1.a only applies to grinding or 
milling machine tools.
b. "eccentricity" (axial displacement) in a full spindle rotation 
less (better) than 0.0006 mm total gauge reading (TIR);
Note: X.B.X.004.d.1.b applies to machine tools for turning 
only.
c. "out-of-roundness" (radial displacement) in a full 
spindle rotation less (better) than 0.0006 mm total 
gauge reading (TIR); or
d. positioning accuracy, with all available compensations, 
less (better) than: 0.001° in any axis of rotation;
2. wire-type EDM machines with simultaneous co-ordination for 
contouring control on five or more axes.
X.B.X.05 Non 'numerically controlled' machine tools for generating optical quality 
surfaces (see list of items subject to authorisation) and specially designed 
components thereof:
a. turning machines using a single-cutting tool and having all the following 
characteristics:
1. carriage positioning accuracy less (better) than 0.0005 mm 
per 300 mm of travel;
2. bidirectional carriage positioning repeatability less (better) 
than 0.00025 mm per 300 mm of travel;
3. "out-of-roundness" and "eccentricity" of the spindle less (better) 
than
0.0004 mm, total meter reading (TIR);
4. angular deviation of bogie movement (sway, roll and pitch) less 
(better) than 2 arc seconds, total meter reading (TIR), over a full 
stroke; and
5. perpendicularity of the carriage less (better) than 0.001 mm per 
300 mm of travel;
Technical note:
The bi-directional positioning repeatability of the carriage (R) of an axis 
is the maximum value of the positioning repeatability at any position 
along or about the axis, determined by the procedure and under the 
conditions specified in section 2.11 of ISO 230/2:1988.
b. single-edged milling machines with all the following characteristics:
1. "out-of-roundness" and "eccentricity" of the spindle less (better) 
than 0.0004 mm, total meter reading (TIR); and
2. angular deviation of carriage movement (sway, roll and pitch) less 
(better) than 2 arc seconds, total meter reading (TIR), over a full 
stroke.
X.B.X.06 Gear manufacturing and/or finishing machinery not controlled under 
2B003 capable of producing gears of a higher quality than AGMA level 11.
X.B.X.07 Dimensional inspection or measuring systems or equipment, not controlled in 
2B006 or 2B206, as follows (see list of controlled goods)
a. manual dimensional inspection machines with all the following 
characteristics:
1. two or more axes; and
2. measurement uncertainty equal to or less (better) than (3 + 
L/300) μm on any axis (L represents the measured length in 
mm).
X.B.X.08 "Robots" not controlled by 2B007 or 2B207 capable of using feedback 
information in real time processing from one or more sensors to generate or 
modify programmes or to generate or modify numerical programme data.
X.B.X.09 Assemblies, circuits or inserts specially designed for machine tools controlled 
under X.B.X.004 or for equipment controlled under X.B.X.006, X.B.X.007 or 
X.B.X.008:
a. Spindle assemblies, consisting as a minimum assembly of spindles and 
bearings whose radial movement ("out-of-roundness") or axial 
movement ("eccentricity") in a complete spindle rotation is less (better) 
than 0.0006 mm, total meter reading (TIR);
b. single-point diamond cutting tool inserts with all the following 
characteristics:
1. capable of making cuts without flaws or splinters detectable at 
400 times magnification in any direction;
2. cutting radius of 0.1 to 5 mm, inclusive; and
3. cutting radius ovality less (better) than 0.002 mm, total meter 
reading (TIR);
c. Printed circuit boards specially designed with mounted components 
capable of upgrading, according to the manufacturer's specifications, 
"numerical control" units, machine tools or feedback devices to levels 
equal to or greater than those specified in X.B.X.004, X.B.X.006, 
X.B.X.007, X.B.X.008 or X.B.X.009.
Technical note:
This item does not control interferometric measuring systems without 
closed- or open-loop feedback, containing a laser for measuring 
carriage movement errors of machine tools, dimensional inspection 
machines or similar equipment.
X.B.X.10 Specific processing equipment, other than those specified in the Common 
Military List or the Annexes to the OBDI, as follows (see list of items subject 
to authorisation)
a. isostatic presses, other than those specified in the annexes of the OBDI;
b. bellows production equipment, including hydraulic moulding 
equipment and bellows moulding dies;
c. laser welding machines;
d. MIG welders;
e. electron beam welders;
f. monel equipment, including valves, pipes, tanks and vessels;
g. valves, pipes, tanks and vessels made of stainless steel 304 and 316;
Note: For the purposes of X.B.X.010.g, fittings are considered part of the 
pipework.
h. mining or drilling equipment:
1. large survey equipment capable of drilling holes over 61 cm in 
diameter;
2. large earthmoving equipment in use in the mining industry;
i. electroplating equipment designed for coating parts with nickel or 
aluminium;
j. pumps designed for industrial operation and use with an electric motor 
of 5 hp or more;
k. vacuum valves, piping, flanges, gaskets and related equipment specially 
designed for use in high vacuum, other than those specified in the 
annexes to the OBDI;
l. plate turning and flow-forming machines, other than those specified in 
the annexes to the OBDI;
m. multi-plane centrifugal balancing machines other than those 
specified in the annexes to the OBDI; or
n. austenitic stainless steel plates, valves, pipes, tanks and vessels.
X.B.X.11 Floor-mounted extractor hoods (walk-in type) with a minimum nominal 
width of 2.5 metres.
X.B.X.12 Class II biological safety cabins and glove chambers.
X.B.X.13 Batch-operated centrifuges with a rotor capacity of 4 litres or more for use with 
biological materials.
X.B.X.14 Fermenters with an internal volume of 10-20 litres that can be used with 
biological materials.
X.B.X.15 Reaction vessels, reactors, stirrers, heat exchangers, condensers, pumps 
(including single-seal pumps), valves, storage tanks, vessels, buffer tanks and 
distillation columns or absorption towers that meet the performance 
parameters for authorisation in 2B350(31), regardless of materials of 
construction.
31 See annexes to the OBDI.
Note: Hydraulic valves and storage tanks with a total internal (geometric) 
volume of less than 1 m3 (1 000 litres) designed for domestic water or gas 
installations are excluded for the purposes of the authorisation in X.B.X.015.
X.B.X.16 Conventional or turbulent flow controlled atmosphere cells and self-contained 
fan units with HEPA filter that could be used for P3 or P4 containment media 
(BSL 3, BSL 4, L3, L4).
X.B.X.17 Vacuum pumps with a maximum flow rate specified by the manufacturer of 
more than 1 m3 /hour (under standard temperature and pressure conditions), 
and casings (pump bodies), preformed casing liners, impellers, rotors and 
pump jet nozzles designed for such pumps, with all surfaces in direct contact 
with the chemicals to be processed made of materials subject to authorisation.
X.B.X.18 Laboratory equipment, including parts and accessories thereof, for the 
analysis or detection, destructive or non-destructive, of chemical 
substances.
X.B.X.19 Whole chlor-alkali electrolysis cells - mercury, diaphragm and membrane.
X.B.X.20 Titanium electrodes (including those with coatings obtained from other metal 
oxides) specially designed for use in chlor-alkali cells.
X.B.X.21 Nickel electrodes (including those with coatings obtained from other metal 
oxides) specially designed for use in chlor-alkali cells.
X.B.X.22 Bipolar electrodes of titanium and nickel (including those with coatings made 
from other metal oxides), specially designed for use in chlor-alkali cells.
X.B.X.23 Asbestos diaphragms specially designed for use in chlor-alkali cells.
X.B.X.24 Fluoropolymer diaphragms specially designed for use in chlor-alkali cells.
X.B.X.25 Fluoropolymer ion-exchange membranes specially designed for use in 
chlor-alkali cells.
X.B.X.26 Specially designed compressors to compress wet or dry chlorine, 
regardless of the material of construction.
X.B.X.27 Microwave reactors - Apparatus and devices, also electrically heated, for the 
treatment of materials by operations involving a change of temperature, such as 
heating.
X.D.X.01 "Software" specially designed or modified for the "development", "production" 
or "use" of the equipment licensed in X.A.X.001.
X.D.X.02 "Software" "required" for the "development", "production" or "use" of the 
concealed object detection equipment licensed in X.A.X.002.
X.D.X.03 "Software" specially designed for the "development", "production" or 
"use" of equipment subject to authorisation in X.B.X.004,
X.B.X.006 or X.B.X.007, X.B.X.008 and X.B.X.009.
X.D.X.04 "Specific 'Software', as follows (see list of items subject to 
authorisation):
a. 'software' enabling adaptive control and having the following two 
characteristics:
1. intended for flexible manufacturing units (FMUs); and
2. capable of generating or modifying with real-time processing 
programmes or data using signals obtained simultaneously by 
means of at least two detection techniques, such as:
a. machine vision (telemetry
optics);
b. infrared image;
c. acoustic image (telemetry
acoustics);
d. contact measurement;
e. inertial positioning;
f. force measurement; and
g. torque measurement.
Note: X.D.X.004.a does not control 'software' that only allows 
functionally identical equipment to be re-planned over time within 
'flexible manufacturing units' using pre-recorded part programmes and 
a pre-recorded strategy for distributing those programmes.
b. not used.
X.D.X.05 "Software" specially designed or modified for the "development", "production" 
or "use" of the goods controlled under X.A.X.004 or X.A.X.005.
Note: See 2E001 ("development") for "technology" for "software" controlled in 
this entry.
X.D.X.006 'Software' specially designed for the 'development' or 'production' of 
portable electric generators subject to authorisation in X.A.X.006.
X.E.X.01 "Technology' 'necessary' for the 'development', 'production' or 'use' of the
equipment subject to authorisation in X.A.X.002 or "necessary" for the 
"development" of "software" subject to authorisation in X.D.X.002.
Note: See X.A.X.002 and X.D.X.002 for authorisations of related products and 
'software'.
X.E.X.02 "Technology" for the "use" of equipment controlled under X.B.X.004, 
X.B.X.006, X.B.X.007 or X.B.X.008.
X.E.X.03 "Technology' in accordance with the General Technology Note for the 'use' of
equipment subject to authorisation in X.A.X.004 or X.A.X.005.
X.E.X.04 "Technology" for the "use" of portable electric generators subject to 
authorisation in X.A.X.006.
Part B
1. Semiconductor devices
CN code Description
8541 10 Diodes, other than photodiodes and light-emitting diodes (LEDs)
8541 21 Transistors, other than phototransistors, with dissipation power of less 
than 1 W
8541 29 Other transistors, other than phototransistors
8541 30 Thyristors, diacs and triacs (excl. photosensitive semiconductor devices)
8541 49 Other photosensitive semiconductor devices
8541 51 Semiconductor transducers
8541 59 Other semiconductor devices
8541 60 Mounted piezoelectric crystals
8541 90 Parts of semiconductor devices, photosensitive semiconductor devices, 
light-emitting diodes (LEDs), mounted piezoelectric crystals
2. Electronic integrated circuits, manufacturing and testing equipment
CN code Description
3818
Chemical elements doped for use in electronics, in the form of 
discs, platelets or similar forms; chemical compounds doped for use 
in electronics
8486 10 Machines and apparatus for the manufacture of ingots or slabs
8486 20 Machines and apparatus for the manufacture of semiconductor devices or 
electronic integrated circuits
8486 40 Machines and appliances referred to in Note 11(C) to this Chapter
8534 Printed circuits
8537 10
Boards, panels, consoles, desks, cabinets and other bases, equipped 
with two or more apparatus of heading 8535 or 8536, for electric 
control or the distribution of electricity, including those incorporating 
instruments or apparatus of Chapter 90, and numerical control 
apparatus, other than switching apparatus of heading 8517, for a voltage 
not exceeding
1 000 V
8542 31
Processors and controllers, whether or not combined with memories, 
converters, logic circuits, amplifiers, clocks, synchronisation or other 
circuits
8542 32 Memories
8542 33 Amplifiers
8542 39 Other electronic integrated circuits
8542 90 Electronic integrated circuit parts
8543 20 Signal generators
9027 50 Other instruments and devices using optical radiation (UV, visible, IR)
9030 20 Oscilloscopes and oscillographs
9030 32 Multimeters, with recording device
9030 39 Instruments and apparatus for measuring or controlling voltage, current, 
resistance or electrical power (other than those for measuring or 
controlling discs or semiconductor devices), with recording device
9030 82 Instruments and apparatus for measuring or controlling semiconductor 
disks (wafers) or devices (including integrated circuits)
3. Cameras, sensors and optical components
CN code Description
8525 89 Other cameras, digital cameras and camcorders
8529 90 Other parts suitable for use solely or principally with the apparatus of 
headings 8524 to 8528
9006 30
Specially constructed cameras for underwater or aerial photography; for 
endoscopy; for forensic or judicial identity laboratories
9006 91 Camera parts and accessories
9013 10 Rifle scopes for weapons; periscopes; telescopes for machines, apparatus 
or instruments of this Chapter or of Section XVI
9013 80 Other optical devices, apparatus and instruments
9025 19 Other thermometers and pyrometers, not combined with other instruments
9032 10 Thermostats
4. Other electrical/magnetic components
CN code Description
8501 32 Other DC motors and DC generators of an output exceeding 750 W and 
not exceeding 75 kW (excluding photovoltaic generators)
8504 31 Other transformers of power less than or equal to 1 kVA (excluding 
those with liquid dielectric)
8504 40 Static converters
8505 11 Permanent magnets and objects intended to become permanent magnets 
after magnetisation; of metal
8529 10 Parts suitable for use solely or principally with the apparatus of 
headings 8524 to 8528: - Aerials and aerial reflectors of all kinds; parts 
suitable for use with such articles
8532 21 Other fixed tantalum capacitors (excluding power capacitors)
8532 22 Aluminium electrolytic fixed electrical capacitors (excluding power 
capacitors)
8532 24 Multilayer ceramic dielectric capacitors (excluding power capacitors)
8533 21 Fixed heating elements with a power output of 20 W or less (excluding 
heating elements and fixed carbon heating elements)
8533 40 Variable electrical resistors, including rheostats and potentiometers 
(excluding coiled variable resistors and heating resistors)
8536 41 Relay, for a voltage less than or equal to 60 V
8536 49 Relays, for a voltage higher than 60 V and less than or equal to 1 000 V
8536 50 Other switches, disconnectors and change-over switches
8536 69 Plugs and sockets
8536 90 Other apparatus for switching, isolating, protecting, branching, 
connecting or interconnecting electrical circuits (e.g. switches, 
changeover switches, relays, safety circuit breakers, overcurrent 
limiters, plugs and sockets, lamp holders and other connectors, junction 
boxes) for a voltage not exceeding 1 000 V;
fibre optic connectors, bundles or cables
ex 8543 70 Microwave amplifiers
ex 8543 70 Digital flight data recorders
ex 8543 70 Antenna amplifiers
8548 Electrical parts of machinery or apparatus, not specified or included 
elsewhere in Chapter 85
5. Machine tools, additive manufacturing equipment and related products
CN code Description
ex 8205 59 Other hand tools and utensils, including glass-cutting diamonds, and 
tools for masons, modellers, cement workers, plasterers and painters
8456 11 Laser-operated machine tools operating with removal of any material
8457 10 Machining centres for metalworking
8458 11 Horizontal lathes, including turning centres, operating with metal 
removal, numerically controlled
8458 91 Others, numerically controlled
8459 61 Other milling machines, numerically controlled
8466 10 Tool holders for hand tools of all kinds and for machine tools; snap-in 
dies
8466 93 Parts and accessories suitable for use solely or principally with the 
machines of headings 8456 to 8461, n.e.c.
8485 20 Additive manufacturing machines for plastics or rubber deposition
8485 30 Additive manufacturing machines for plaster, cement, ceramic or glass 
deposits
8485 90 Machine parts for additive manufacturing
6. Energy materials and precursors
CN code Description
2829 90 Perchlorates; bromates and perbromates; iodates and periodates
4706 10 Fibre pulps made from recycled paper or cardboard (leftovers or waste) 
or from other fibrous cellulosic materials: cotton linters pulps
7. Electronic devices, modules and assemblies
CN code Description
8471 50 Information-processing units, other than those of subheading 8471 41 or 
8471 49, which may comprise, in the same housing, one or two of the 
following types of units: memory units, input units and output units
ex 8471 70 Other memory units
8471 80 Units of automatic information processing machines (excluding 
information processing units, input or output units and memory units)
8517 62 Equipment for the reception, conversion and transmission or 
regeneration of voice, images or other data, including switching and 
routing equipment
8517 69 Other apparatus for transmitting or receiving voice, images or other 
data, including apparatus for communication in a wired or wireless 
network (such as a local or wide area network)
8517 79
Other parts
8526 91 Radionavigation equipment
9014 20 Instruments and apparatus for air or space navigation (other than 
compasses)
9014 80 Other navigation instruments and devices
8. Chemicals, metals, alloys, compounds and other advanced materials
CN code Description
8112 41 Crude rhenium and rhenium waste, scrap and powder
8112 49 Rhenium, other than crude and waste, scrap and dust
9. Parts, assemblies and components of machines or equipment
CN code Description
8482 10 Ball bearings
8482 20 Tapered roller bearings, including cone and tapered roller assemblies
8482 30 Barrel roller bearings
8482 50 Other cylindrical roller bearings, including cage and roller assemblies
10. Various articles
CN code Description
8807 30 Other parts of aircraft, helicopters or unmanned aerial vehicles
".