Chapter 1 of this document provides information to help interpret the provisions on the freezing of 
assets, which apply to all sanctions ordinances that provide for the freezing of assets and economic 
resources.
Chapter 2 contains important information for the interpretation of Articles 12b, 13, 14, 14a, 14c, 14e, 
14f, 15, 16, 20, 21, 22, 23, 25, 28b, 28d and 28e of the Ordinance instituting measures in connection 
with the situation in Ukraine (SR 946.231.176.72)1.
This document is not legally binding. Compliance with the provisions of the Ordinance is the sole 
responsibility of the persons and bodies affected by the sanctions.
The Swiss authorities endeavour to align the implementation of sanctions as far as possible with that in 
the European Union (EU) and are in contact with the competent bodies of the latter to this end. SECO 
reserves the right to make additions or amendments to this document in the future.
Federal Department of Economic Affairs, 
Education and Research EAER
State Secretariat for Economic Affairs SECO
Sanctions
Interpretation of sanctions
State 27 August 2024
Below are answers to frequently asked questions. Questions that are not answered below can be 
directed to sanctions@seco.admin.ch.
1 Unless otherwise specified, the information and interpretations contained in Chapter 2 also apply to the identical provisions of the Ordinance 
imposing measures against Belarus (SR 946.231.116.9).
SECO-D-FE893401/72

Summary
1 General indications on the interpretation of asset freezing measures in the
swiss sanctions ............................................................................................................................4
1.1 Which normal administrative operations are not covered by the freezing of assets 
and can therefore be carried out by financial institutions without requiring
an authorisation? ..................................................................................................................4
1.2 Can proceeds from corporate actions on a blocked account be credited to the blocked 
account?...............................................................................................................................4
1.3 Can proceeds from securities issued by sanctioned ................companies or organisations 
..........................................................................................................................be accepted?
.............................................................................................................................................4
1.4 Financial institutions in Switzerland may accept payments from non-sanctioned clients
of banks subject to sanctions? .............................................................................................5
1.5 Banks must declare whether they block payments from non-sanctioned customers
in favour of sanctioned individuals, companies or organisations? ........................................5
1.6 Are the notifications on the freezing of assets and economic resources to be updated in 
the event of changes in assets? ..........................................................................................5
1.7 With regard to assets or economic resources notified to SECO that are 'blocked as a 
precautionary measure', can persons and financial institutions unblock them 
independently, i.e. without first consulting SECO?...............................................................5
1.8 How should the concept of 'ownership' in companies or organisations be interpreted?.......6
1.9 How should the concept of 'control' over a company or organisation be interpreted?..........6
1.10 Can operational measures be taken to remove effective control over the ownership or 
control relationships of an indirectly sanctioned Swiss company or organisation? 7 .............
2 Interpretation of specific provisions of the ordinance instituting measures
in relation to the situation in Ukraine .........................................................................................7
2.1 Trading, brokering and transportation of crude oil and petroleum products with or
to third countries (Art. 12b)...................................................................................................7
2.2 Steel Products and Economically Important Goods (Art. 14a and 14c) ...............................8
2.3 Import and export of goods from/to designated territories and prohibition of financing, 
participation and services in designated territories (Articles 13, 14 and 25) ..................... 10
2.4 Diamonds and diamond products (Art. 14e).......................................................................12
2.5 Contractual obligation to prevent re-exportation (Art. 14f)..................................................13
2.6 Freezing of assets and economic resources and obligation to notify (Art. 15 and 16) .14
2.7 Ban on accepting deposits and assets based on cryptocurrencies and related
declaration obligation (Art. 20 and 21)................................................................................16
To whom are Articles 20 and 21 addressed? .....................................................................16
How should declarations be made according to Article 21?...............................................16
How is the CHF 100,000 limit calculated?..........................................................................17
Which natural persons are covered by Article 20 of the Ordinance?..................................18
Which legal persons are covered by Article 20 of the Ordinance? .....................................19
Do Russian consular and diplomatic representations in Switzerland fall under Article 20 of 
the Ordinance? .................................................................................................................. 20
Other questions ..................................................................................................................20
2.8 Prohibition of central depositories from providing certain services (Art. 22).......................21
2.9 Prohibition to Sell Securities (Art. 23).................................................................................21
2.10 Prohibition of transactions with the Central Bank of the Russian Federation (Art. 24).......22
2.11 Prohibitions on Energy and Mining Enterprises in the Russian Federation (Art. 28b)....... 22
2.12 Prohibitions concerning trusts (Art. 28d).............................................................................23
Which legal institutions are affected by Article 28d? ....................................................23
2/26
What is meant by control? ..................................................................................................24
What territorial scope is envisaged? ...................................................................................24
How does the derogation in Article 28d para. 3 apply?......................................................25
Is there a transitional period? If so, how is it regulated? ....................................................25
2.13 Prohibitions concerning services (Art. 28e) ........................................................................26
3/26
1 General Guidelines on the Interpretation of Asset Freezing 
Measures in Swiss Sanctions
1.1What are the normal administrative transactions that do not fall under the asset freeze2 and 
can therefore be carried out by financial institutions without requiring authorisation?
Blocking of assets is understood to be the prevention of any action allowing the administration or use 
of the blocked assets. Consequently, portfolio management, i.e. the realisation of new investments or 
the sale and exchange of investment products using the blocked assets, is also prohibited. Normal 
administrative operations of financial institutions are not covered by the freezing of assets. These are 
in particular the charging of fees (e.g. for account management) and the recording of interest.
1.2Can proceeds from corporate actions on a blocked account be credited to the blocked 
account?
In principle, the transfer of assets or the direct and indirect provision of assets and economic resources 
to persons subject to the asset freeze is prohibited. In practice, income from 'corporate actions' may 
accumulate on accounts frozen as a result of the freezing of assets. They originate from securities that 
were included in the investment portfolio of the affected account before the sanction.
In order to take into account the operational realities in the securities business, the proceeds of 
compulsory 'corporate actions' without a choice option - typically share dividends or bond interest, but 
also exchange offers in connection with certificates of deposit - may be credited to the corresponding 
account without prior approval by SECO and kept blocked. This also applies to proceeds from 
'corporate actions' with a choice, where the holder does not actively choose an option, but the 
proceeds are transferred to the bank in cash and no new investment is made.
Financial institutions must separately disclose and identify income from corporate actions when 
updating the value of blocked assets, which is done once a year.
The execution of non-mandatory 'corporate actions' and 'corporate actions' with a choice, in which the 
holder makes an active choice, is still prohibited without prior approval by SECO.
1.3Can proceeds from securities issued by sanctioned companies or organisations3 be 
accepted?
Transactions by sanctioned legal persons, companies or organisations to distribute the proceeds of 
securities issued by them are generally subject to asset freezing. Accordingly, the Swiss financial 
institutions carrying out the final accounting must block such transactions and report them to SECO. 
The latter may authorise at a later stage, on the basis of the corresponding provision in the ordinances, 
the release of the funds and their posting to any account in Switzerland.
In view of the large number of this type of transactions, a simplified procedure is applied for crediting 
the accounts of non-sanctioned customers with proceeds from securities issued by sanctioned 
companies or organisations in cases where the transaction was generated by these same entities. 
Recurring and mandatory transactions in relation to securities issued by companies or organisations 
subject to financial sanctions -  including corporate actions in the form of stock dividends,
2 See e.g. Art. 1b of the Ordinance on Measures against Syria (SR 946.231.172.7).
3 The companies and organisations subject to the freezing of assets and the prohibition on making assets available are listed in the provisions 
of the various sanctions ordinances and their annexes, such as in Annex 8 to the Ordinance instituting measures in connection with the 
situation in Ukraine (SR 946.231.167.72) or Annex 7 to the Ordinance instituting measures in connection with Syria (SR 946.231.172.7). 4/26
4
Ibid.
5/26
bond interests, exchange offers in connection with certificates of deposit - are not subject to prior 
authorisation.
Starting with the calendar year 2024, the financial institutions carrying out the final accounting for the 
above transactions will provide SECO by the end of February with an annual overview of the 
transactions carried out (reference date: 31 December of the previous year). Statements must be made 
for each security (ISIN number) and, in addition to the ISIN, must contain information on its type, the 
type of proceeds (share dividend, bond interest, etc.), the number of business relationships involved, 
the number of transactions executed and the amount credited (total amount per currency). Non-
mandatory 'corporate actions' remain subject to the authorisation requirement.
1.4Can financial institutions in Switzerland accept payments from non-sanctioned customers of 
sanctioned banks4?
Payments sent by non-sanctioned clients of sanctioned banks generally fall under the asset freeze. 
Accordingly, Swiss financial institutions that do the final accounting should in theory block such 
transactions upon receipt and report them to SECO.
However, a simplified procedure applies. Payments by non-sanctioned customers from their accounts 
with sanctioned banks can be accepted and accounted for without the prior approval of SECO.
Financial institutions making final payment entries shall provide SECO with a quarterly overview of 
payments received. Statements must be made for each business relationship concerned and include 
information on the banks involved, the accounts concerned (account numbers, sender, recipient), the 
number of payments and the amount credited (total amount per currency).
1.5Do banks have to declare whether they block payments from non-sanctioned customers to 
sanctioned individuals, companies or organisations?
Yes, payments to sanctioned recipients must be blocked and reported to SECO. However, the 
payment amount does not have to be blocked, but can be credited back to the non-sanctioned sender.
1.6Must the notifications on the freezing of assets and economic resources be updated in the event 
of changes in assets?
No continuous updating of assets is required. The financial institutions do, however, send SECO by 15 
February each year the updated data on all assets blocked under the various sanction regimes 
(reference date: 31 December of the previous year). The corresponding notifications to SECO are 
made exclusively via the appropriate table, which is available on SECO's website, and transmitted 
electronically, preferably via the FDJP-certified PrivaSphere Secure Messaging or by means of a file 
transfer.
1.7With regard to assets or economic resources subject to notification to SECO that are
'blocked as a precautionary measure', can individuals and financial institutions release them 
independently, i.e. without consulting SECO beforehand?
Persons and institutions that hold or manage assets or are aware of assets or economic resources 
allegedly falling within the scope of the freeze are required to consult SECO and explain the reasons 
that would justify the release of such funds and resources. The decision is then up to SECO.
9 Ibid.
6/26
1.8How should the concept of 'ownership'5 be interpreted in companies or organisations?
Ownership exists when a natural person, enterprise or organisation directly or indirectly holds more 
than 50 per cent of the ownership rights of an enterprise or organisation. The ownership shares of 
several sanctioned natural persons, enterprises or organisations are generally added together, i.e. 
considered in the aggregate.
1.9How should the concept of 'control'6  over an enterprise or organisation be interpreted?
In order to clarify whether a company or organisation is controlled by a natural person, a company or 
organisation alone or on the basis of an agreement with another shareholder or a third party, the 
following criteria in particular must be considered:
a) the natural person, undertaking or organisation may, formally or de facto7, appoint and/or dismiss the 
majority of the members of the board of directors or management of the undertaking or organisation;
b) formally or de facto8 holds a majority of the voting rights of the enterprise or organisation;
c) has the right to exercise a dominant influence over the undertaking or organisation on the basis of 
a contract concluded with that undertaking or organisation or pursuant to a provision to that effect in 
its memorandum or articles of association;
d) may avail itself of the right to exercise a dominant influence within the meaning of subparagraph c 
even though it does not hold such a right9;
e) has the right to use, in whole or in part, the assets and economic resources of the enterprise or 
organisation or to dispose of them;
f) manages the activity of the company or organisation on a unified basis, while publishing 
consolidated accounts;
g) jointly and severally shares or guarantees the financial liabilities of an enterprise or 
organisation;
h) as a lender, formally and/or de facto exercises a dominant influence on management decisions.
If one of these criteria is met, the enterprise or organisation is deemed to be under the control of 
another person or organisation, unless the contrary can be demonstrated on a case-by-case basis.
In situations of transfers of value to third parties (e.g. sale of company shares or donations to family 
members or other connected natural persons), further elements must be taken into account. If, at the 
time of the assessment, there is a well-founded suspicion that the assets or economic resources have 
been formally transferred to a third party, but that the sanctioned natural person, company or 
organisation still exercises control over those assets or economic resources, they must be frozen. The 
time at which the assets or economic resources were transferred to a non-sanctioned third party is not 
a determining factor. The following non-exhaustive list of criteria may be used for the assessment:
• the close relationship (family, business, personal) between the person directly subject to the 
freezing of assets or economic resources and the third party;
• the economic and/or professional independence of the third party who is now the 
nominal owner of the assets or economic resources;
• the value and frequency/regularity of suspicious donations as compared to donations to 
third parties made before the sanction was imposed;
• the existence and content of formal agreements between the sanctioned person and the third person;
5 See e.g. Article 15 of the Ordinance instituting measures in connection with the situation in Ukraine (SR 946.231.176.72).
6 Ibid.
7 For instance, through a front person.
8 Ibid.
• observance of the arm's length principle10 in the transfer of value (e.g. terms of sale of 
company shares).
1.10Can operational measures be taken to remove effective control over the ownership or control 
relationships of an indirectly sanctioned Swiss company or organisation?
Companies or organisations established in Switzerland may take measures to prevent sanctioned 
natural persons, companies or organisations from effectively exercising their rights in relation to 
beneficial ownership or control.
These 'ring fencing' measures (also known as 'firewalls') aim to remove the control over the assets of 
a company or organisation exercised by a sanctioned individual, company or organisation. They allow 
companies or organisations based in Switzerland to continue their business activities. Assets 
belonging to the sanctioned natural person, business or organisation remain blocked and it must be 
ensured that neither assets nor economic resources are made available, directly or indirectly, to 
sanctioned natural persons, businesses or organisations.
SECO confirms to the company or organisation concerned that the
"ring fencing'. With regard to the Ordinance instituting measures in connection with the situation in 
Ukraine (SR 946.231.176.72), SECO may, if necessary, authorise exemptions for the implementation of 
such measures in accordance with Article 15 para. 10 and/or Article 28e para. 3 of the Ordinance.
SECO generally applies its ring fencing criteria in line with those of the technical note published by the 
European Commission (Guidance Note - Implementation of Firewalls in cases of EU entities owned or 
controlled by a designated person or entity). The criteria for ring fencing measures by companies or 
organisations based in Switzerland are based on the explanations contained in Annex 2 of this note 
(Criteria for firewalls by operators and the use of external audits in this context).
Before implementing any 'ring fencing' measures, the importance of the company concerned, both in terms of 
market position and employment volume, is examined. These measures are generally only possible for 
companies operating in sectors considered 'essential', i.e. food production, pharmaceuticals, fertilisers, 
chemicals, water management, waste water treatment and nuclear energy.
2 Interpretation of specific provisions of the ordinance instituting 
measures in connection with the situation in Ukraine11
2.1 Trade, brokering and transport of crude oil and petroleum products 
with or into third countries (Art. 12b)
2.1.1 How do economic operators in the supply chain of Russian crude oil or petroleum products 
have to ensure and document compliance with the provisions of Article 12b, paragraphs 4(b) 
and 5?
In view of the international interconnectedness of the oil trade and the importance of a uniform 
application of price caps, SECO refers to the EU Commission's FAQs on the implementation of EU 
Council Regulations 269/2014 and 833/2014, in particular the explanations
10 According to this principle, transactions must take place on the same terms that would have been agreed upon between unrelated third 
parties in an arm's length environment and in comparable circumstances.
11 SR 946.231.176.72, hereinafter referred to as 'Ordinance'. 7/26
contained in Chapter E "Energy", item 5 "Oil Price Cap", section 7 "Attestations, recordkeeping and 
itemised ancillary costs". These explanations indicate which information and documents are suitable for 
the corresponding proofs.
2.2 Steel Products and Economically Important Goods12 (Art. 14a and 14c)
2.2.1 Is the purchase of goods listed in Annexes 17 and 20 permitted if the goods are destined for 
a third country outside Switzerland and are not transported through Swiss territory?
No. Articles 14a and 14c of the Ordinance prohibit the purchase of goods listed in Annexes 17 and 20 
of the Ordinance if they originate in Russia or are exported from Russia. This prohibition applies 
regardless of the final destination of the goods.
Switzerland is determined to contribute to the fight against global food and energy crises. The Federal 
Council has explicitly stated that none of the sanction measures against Russia are directed against 
trade in agricultural and food products between third countries and Russia13 . For this purpose, the 
purchase of certain goods listed in Annex 20 of the Ordinance and destined for a third country 
according to Article 14c paragraph 4 is permitted. This applies to the purchase, as well as to the 
provision of related services such as financial assistance, of the following goods listed in Annex 21 of 
the Ordinance:
- Potassium chloride (Tariff heading: 3104 20)
- Mineral or chemical fertilisers containing the three fertilising elements nitrogen, phosphorus 
and potassium (3105 20)
- Mineral or chemical fertilisers containing the two fertilising elements phosphorus and potassium (3105 
60)
- Other fertilisers containing potassium chloride (ex 3105 90)
2.2.2 Is the transport of goods listed in Annex 20 by a Swiss company permitted if the goods 
are destined for a third country outside Switzerland and are not transported through 
Swiss territory?
Yes. Article 14c of the Ordinance prohibits the transport of the goods listed in Annex 20 to and through 
Switzerland. However, transport by a Swiss company is permitted if the goods are destined for a third 
country outside Switzerland and are not transported through Swiss territory.
2.2.3 Is the provision of services - including financial assistance, brokerage or insurance 
services - for the transport of goods listed in Annex 20 permitted if the goods are destined 
for a third country outside Switzerland and are not transported through Swiss territory?
Yes, Article 14c of the Ordinance prohibits the provision of services - including financial assistance, 
brokerage or insurance services - for prohibited activities by persons, companies and bodies 
established in Switzerland. Since the transport of goods listed in Annex 20 is permitted if the goods are 
destined for a third state outside Switzerland and do not transit Swiss territory (see above), the 
provision of services related to such transport is also permitted.
12 From 16 August 2023, these also include coal and coal products, previously listed in Annex 22.
13 'Ukraine: Switzerland implements new sanctions', Federal Council press release of 3 August 2022. 8/26
14 The decisive factor is the customs tariff heading used to import the goods into Switzerland.
9/26
2.2.4 Which documents count as 'proof of the country of origin of the steel inputs used for the 
processing of goods in a third country' according to Article 14a para. 4bis? In which cases 
must such proof be provided?
When importing or transporting goods listed in Annex 17 of the Ordinance14, the following documents 
are considered sufficient proof if they attest to the country of origin of the iron or steel used as inputs:
a) For semi-finished products:
The mill test certificate, which contains the name of the company where the production takes 
place, the name of the country where the casting took place (see casting number) and the 
classification of the product under the subheading (six-digit customs tariff heading).
b) For finished products:
The test certificate(s) containing the following information:
i. the name of the country and company where the merger took place (see merger 
number) and the classification of the product under the subheading (six-digit customs 
tariff heading); and
ii. the name of the country and the name of the company where, if any, the following 
work was carried out:
1.hot-rolling;
2.cold rolling;
3.hot metal coating;
4.electrolytic metal coating;
5.organic coating;
6.welding;
7.drilling/extrusion;
8.moulding/rolling;
9.ERW/SAW/HFI/laser welding.
In addition to the above-mentioned documents, invoices, delivery notes, quality certificates, long-term 
supplier declarations, production calculation documents, customs documents of the exporting country, 
trade letters, product descriptions, manufacturer's declarations or exclusion clauses in purchase 
contracts, which prove the non-Russian origin of the preliminary goods, may also be recognised as 
suitable evidence. Responsibility for the accuracy of the information contained in the above documents 
lies with the importer.
In the case of the import or transport from the European Economic Area (EEA) or the United Kingdom 
of steel products or the re-import of steel products that were already in free circulation in Switzerland 
and are re-imported without modification, no proof is required.
In the case of direct import or transport from a third country, proof must be available at the time of 
import of steel products listed in Annex 17 that have been processed in a third country, which must be 
presented to the implementing authorities upon request; as of 1 March 2024, it must be entered as a 
document (document code Y824) under the heading "Documents" in the customs declaration. The 
document must be presented on request to the Federal Customs and Border Security Office (FCO) 
together with the other accompanying customs documents.
In case of doubt, the enforcement authorities may require further evidence, e.g. separate test 
certificates for the different processing steps undergone by the product. All certificates must be 
consistent with each other.
Since products under customs tariff headings 7207.11, 7207.1210 and 7224.90 are semi-finished 
products, under the sanctions provisions in force, the Russian Federation may include between 30
10/26
September 2023 and 1 April 2028 on the test certificate as the name of the country where the melting 
took place (cf. melt number) for products manufactured using inputs of customs tariff heading 7207.11. 
The same applies until 1 October 2024 for products manufactured using inputs of customs tariff 
7207.1210 or 7224.90. If, on the other hand, the Russian Federation is indicated as the country where 
the other processing was carried out (e.g. hot rolling, cold rolling), import, transport and purchase of 
the goods are not permitted.
2.2.5 Do the prohibitions in Article 14a para. 2 also apply to goods produced or processed in a 
third country before 30 September 2023?
The import bans apply to steel products containing Russian inputs imported into Switzerland after 30 
September 2023, provided they were produced or processed after 23 June 2023. Corresponding steel 
products that were produced or processed before 23 June 2023 are not subject to the bans. The date 
of production or processing must be verifiable.
If the goods in question are already in Switzerland and were presented to customs before 30 
September 2023, Article 31a of the Ordinance applies and the goods may be purchased or transported.
2.3 Import and export of goods from/to designated territories and 
prohibition of financing, participation and services in designated 
territories (Articles 13, 14 and 25)
2.3.1 Articles 13, 14 and 25 speak of 'in the designated territories listed in Annex 6'. How do 
companies and organisations know which territories in the Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson, and 
Zaporizhzhia regions are restricted?
Annex 6 designates - in addition to Crimea and Sevastopol - the territories in the regions of Donetsk, 
Luhansk, Kherson, Zaporizhzhia not controlled by the Ukrainian government. Given the unstable 
situation, it is recommended to dynamically assess whether these territories are actually controlled by 
the Ukrainian government. In case of doubt, companies and organisations can contact SECO.
2.3.2 What goods can be imported into Switzerland from the Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson and 
Zaporizhzhia regions and under what conditions?
Goods originating in the territories in the regions of Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhia not 
under the control of the Government of Ukraine are subject to the provisions of Article 13 paragraph 1. 
They may be imported only if they are accompanied by a certificate of origin issued by the Ukrainian 
authorities. At present, however, Ukraine does not issue certificates of origin for territories outside its 
control. By contrast, goods produced in the territories of Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhia 
regions that are under government control can be imported freely.
Since in the four regions trade between the territories controlled and those not controlled by the 
Ukrainian government is in practice impossible, it is highly unlikely that there will be any exchange of 
goods from the latter to the former. The import of goods from these four regions therefore does not 
require any additional requirements or documents compared to importing from other parts of Ukraine.
If there are reasonable doubts as to whether the goods originate from territories not under the control 
of the Ukrainian government, importation into Switzerland may be subject to additional conditions, e.g. 
the presentation of a copy of the customs export declaration for the goods in question. In order to prove 
that the goods are not subject to the import ban under Article 13 para. 1, the declaration must have 
been accepted by an official Ukrainian customs office.
11/26
2.3.3 What goods can be exported from Switzerland to the Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson 
and Zaporizhzhia regions and under what conditions?
The prohibition on sale, supply, export or transit to any person, company or organisation or for use in 
the territories of Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhia not under the control of the Government 
of Ukraine applies only to the goods listed in Annex 7.
There are no restrictions on exports to the Ukrainian-controlled territories of Donetsk, Luhansk, 
Kherson and Zaporizhzhia. Since trade between Ukrainian government-controlled and non-controlled 
territories is practically impossible in the four regions mentioned, it is highly unlikely that goods 
exported to the controlled territories will be diverted to the non-controlled ones.
If there are reasonable doubts as to the actual destination of the goods to be exported, exporters to 
Switzerland may be asked to submit additional documents, e.g. a declaration by the local Ukrainian 
authority that the consignee is active in the controlled territories, information on the buyer/consignee, 
invoices or similar to prove that the goods are not covered by the prohibition in Article 14 para. 1. As 
with all goods subject to export restrictions, the UDSC may also carry out checks to ensure that the 
goods are not covered by the prohibition. Exceptions are possible, e.g. for humanitarian activities (Art. 
14 para. 3).
2.3.4 Can banks conduct trade-related financial transactions in the Donetsk, Luhansk, 
Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions, and if so, under what conditions?
Banks in Switzerland may not provide certain brokerage or investment services or offer financing or 
financial assistance in the territories of the Donetsk, Luhansk, Kherson and Zaporizhzhia regions that 
are not controlled by the Ukrainian government. In the Kiev-controlled territories, on the other hand, 
financial transactions aimed at supporting local trade are not restricted, as in all other regions of 
Ukraine.
As to whether a territory in the Donetsk, Kherson, Luhansk or Zaporizhzhia regions where a financial 
transaction is to be carried out is under the control of the Ukrainian government, we refer to the 
previous answer on how to assess such control. To do so, banks in Switzerland may contact Ukrainian 
banks operating in the territory in question, provided they consider them reliable on the basis of past 
experience. Similarly, they may also contact the Ukrainian authorities to obtain up-to-date information. 
The principals of the transactions also have the opportunity to prove their legitimacy by submitting the 
declarations and documents mentioned in connection with import and export (see above).
2.3.5 Can Swiss companies provide services to people in the Donetsk, Kherson, Luhansk and 
Zaporizhzhia regions or in connection with activities in those territories?
Certain services provided in the territories of the Donetsk, Kherson, Luhansk and Zaporizhzhia regions 
not under the control of the Government of Ukraine are restricted. Firstly, the sale, supply, export and 
transit of Annex 7 goods are prohibited if destined for natural persons, companies or organisations in 
the designated territories of Annex 6 (Art. 14(1)). It is also prohibited to provide technical assistance, 
brokering services, construction and engineering services as well as financial means or financial 
assistance in relation to Annex 7 goods to natural persons, companies or organisations in the 
designated territories listed in Annex 6 (Art. 14(2)).
In the services sector, secondly, there are several prohibitions that do not concern goods. For example, 
in Annex 6 territories, the provision of investment services within the meaning of Article 25(3) or 
services related to tourism activities is prohibited.
However, there are no restrictions on the provision of services by Swiss companies to persons in the 
territories of the Donetsk, Kherson, Luhansk and Zaporizhzhia regions controlled by the Ukrainian 
authorities. In these
15 In the case of cut diamonds, reference is made to the Kimberley Certificate of the underlying rough 
diamond.
12/26
Swiss companies and banks can provide their services as in all other regions of Ukraine.
Swiss companies and banks intending to provide the above-mentioned services in the regions of 
Donetsk, Kherson, Luhansk and Zaporizhzhia are advised to carefully examine the location of the 
recipient and/or the sector in which the services will be used, depending on the applicable provision. In 
case of doubt, Swiss companies and banks may contact SECO.
2.4 Diamonds and diamond products (Art. 14e)
2.4.1 What are the different steps for the introduction of import bans on diamonds and 
diamond products from or originating in Russia?
As of 1 February 2024, it is prohibited to import diamonds and products listed in Annex 27a from or 
originating in the Russian Federation (Art. 14e para. 1 and 2). The bans on diamonds processed in a 
third country entered into force on 1 March 2024 for diamonds of at least 1 carat (Art. 14e para. 4). The 
bans on natural and synthetic diamonds polished in a third country according to Annex 27a numbers 1 
and 2 weighing 0.5 carat or more or 0.1 gram each came into effect on 1 September 2024 (Art. 14e 
para. 3).
2.4.2 What proof of the country of origin of diamonds must be provided when they are 
imported into Switzerland and indicated in the customs declaration (Art. 14e para. 8)?
For prohibitions under Article 14e Paragraphs 3 and 4, the following applies: adequate evidence must 
be provided to prove the non-Russian origin of diamonds and products containing diamonds. In 
addition to certificates issued by one of the G7 States, the following documents may serve as adequate 
proof: Kimberley certificates15 , invoices, delivery notes, quality certificates, calculation and production 
documents, customs documents of the exporting country, trade letters or production descriptions 
proving the non-Russian origin of the goods. The importer is responsible for the accuracy of the 
information contained in the above documents.
The proof must be entered as a document (document code L147) in the "Documents" section of the 
customs declaration. The document must be presented on request to the Federal Office of Customs 
and Border Security (FCO) together with the other accompanying customs documents. Until 31 August 
2024, no proof is required for diamonds listed in Annex 27a, Number 1, weighing less than 1.0 carat 
per diamond. However, the document code L147 must be declared and completed with the words "no 
proof, less than 1 carat".
2.4.3 What evidence must be provided when importing diamonds and products containing 
diamonds from Russia or of Russian origin - including diamonds processed in a third country 
- that were already in Switzerland or in the EU or in a third country other than the Russian 
Federation before the respective bans came into force ('grandfathered goods')?
According to Article 14e( 6a), exemptions to paragraphs 1, 3 and 4 apply if it is proved that the goods 
were already physically present in Switzerland or in the European Union before the entry into force of 
the respective prohibition and that they were subsequently exported to a third country other than the 
Russian Federation or, in the case of processed goods, that they were physically present, processed or 
manufactured in a third country other than the Russian Federation before the entry into force of the 
respective prohibition.
Customs documents, invoices or purchase receipts may be used as evidence for this purpose. Such 
evidence is intended to prove the facts described above, irrespective of the origin of the diamonds or 
products containing diamonds.
13/26
Companies wishing to export or re-export diamonds or products containing diamonds are advised to 
inform themselves about the legal requirements and guidelines of the destination countries. The (re-
)export of these products to EEA or G7 states is not subject to any restrictions in Switzerland.
2.4.4 Are Kimberley certificates sufficient for the import of rough diamonds (customs tariff 
headings 7102 10 00 and 7102 31 00)?
If the Kimberley Certificate clearly indicates the origin of rough diamonds, it can be accepted as 
evidence. If the certificate contains the indication 'mixed origin', additional proof must be provided (see 
question 2.4.2).
2.4.5 Does the weight referred to in paragraphs 3 and 4 refer to polished diamonds or rough stones?
The weight refers to goods presented at the time of their introduction into Switzerland (polished 
diamonds or rough diamonds).
2.4.6 Does the ban also apply to industrial diamonds and products containing industrial diamonds?
The prohibition applies to customs tariff headings 7102.10, 7102.31 and 7102.39 listed in Annex 27a. 
Industrial diamonds (Customs Tariff headings 7102.21 and 7102.29) are therefore not included.
2.4.7 Do the bans also apply to products that have to be imported into Switzerland for repair or 
improvement?
Article 14e paragraph 6b provides for exemptions from the prohibitions on the provision of services in 
Article 14e paragraph 5 for products in Annex 27a number 3 manufactured before 1 September 2024. 
Temporary use in Switzerland, e.g. to provide repair services or for inward and outward processing, 
therefore remains permitted if the goods were declared under the corresponding customs procedure 
upon import into Switzerland or export from Switzerland and were not temporarily imported or exported 
from the Russian Federation.
2.5 Contractual obligation to prevent re-exportation (Art. 14f)
2.5.1 What is meant by 'appropriate corrective measures' according to paragraph 2 of 
the provision?
To ensure its effectiveness, the contractual clause to prevent re-export to Russia must contain 
appropriate corrective measures to be applied in the event of a breach. These measures should be 
sufficiently effective and dissuasive for companies outside Switzerland. Adequate corrective measures 
are, for example, the termination of the contract or the payment of a penalty in the event of a breach of 
contract.
2.5.2 Do contracts have to contain specific wording?
Economic operators are free to choose an appropriate wording for the clause, provided that the result 
satisfies the requirements of Article 14f. In any event, it is recommended to specify that the clause is an 
essential element of the contract.
The following template, available in Italian and English, can serve as a reference:
"(1) The [importer/purchaser] shall not sell, export or re-export, directly or indirectly, to or for use in the 
Russian Federation any goods supplied under or in connection with this contract that fall within the 
scope of Article 14f of the Ordinance Establishing Measures in Connection with the Situation in Ukraine 
(RS 946.231.176.72).
14/26
(2) The [importer/purchaser] undertakes, to the best of its knowledge and belief, to ensure that the 
purpose of subsection (1) is not violated by third parties downstream in the chain of trade, including 
potential resellers.
(3) The [importer/buyer] shall establish and maintain an appropriate monitoring mechanism to detect 
the behaviour of third parties down the chain of trade, including potential resellers, that may violate the 
purpose of subsection (1).
(4) Any breach of subsection (1), (2) or (3) shall constitute a material breach of an essential element of 
this contract and the [exporter/seller] shall be entitled to seek appropriate remedies, in particular: (i) 
termination of this contract and (ii) payment of a penalty equal to the
[XX] % of the total value of this contract or of the price of the exported goods, whichever is higher.
(5) The [importer/buyer] shall promptly inform the [exporter/vendor] of any problems with the 
application of sub-paragraphs (1), (2) or (3), including any relevant activities of third parties that could 
violate the purpose of sub-paragraph (1). Upon request, the [importer/purchaser] shall provide the 
[exporter/vendor] within two weeks with information on compliance with the obligations set out in 
subparagraphs (1), (2) and (3) ."
***
"(1) The [Importer/Buyer] shall not sell, export or re-export, directly or indirectly, to the Russian 
Federation or for use in the Russian Federation any goods supplied under or in connection with this 
Agreement that fall under the scope of Article 14f of the Ordinance imposing Measures in Connection 
with the Situation in Ukraine (SR 946.231.176.72).
(2) The [Importer/Buyer] shall undertake its best efforts to ensure that the purpose of paragraph (1) is 
not frustrated by any third parties further down the commercial chain, including by possible resellers.
(3) The [Importer/Buyer] shall set up and maintain an adequate monitoring mechanism to detect 
conduct by any third parties further down the commercial chain, including by possible resellers, that 
would frustrate the purpose of paragraph (1).
(4) Any violation of paragraphs (1), (2) or (3) shall constitute a material breach of an essential element 
of this Agreement, and the [Exporter/Seller] shall be entitled to seek appropriate remedies, including, 
but not limited to: (i) termination of this Agreement; and (ii) a penalty of [XX]% of the total value of this 
Agreement or price of the goods exported, whichever is higher.
(5) The [Importer/Buyer] shall immediately inform the [Exporter/Seller] about any problems in applying 
paragraphs (1), (2) or (3), including any relevant activities by third parties that could frustrate the 
purpose of paragraph (1). The [Importer/Buyer] shall make available to the [Exporter/Seller] information 
concerning compliance with the obligations under paragraphs (1), (2) and (3) within two weeks of the 
simple request for such information".
2.6 Freezing of assets and economic resources and reporting obligation (Art. 
15 and 16)
2.6.1 Do securities held by the National Settlement Depository (NSD; SSID: 175-55580) fall 
under the freezing of assets according to Article 15 para. 1 of the Ordinance?
No. Assets owned, held or controlled by the NSD must be blocked. However, assets - including 
securities - that are only deposited with the NSD are not affected by the freezing of assets under Article 
15 para. 1.
15/26
It should also be noted that the NSD is subject to the prohibition to provide assets and economic 
resources according to Article 15 para. 2. Therefore, all activities involving, directly or indirectly, the 
payment of commissions to the NSD or the provision of other funds or economic resources to it or for 
its benefit are prohibited.
2.6.2 Does the sale of Russian securities held by the NSD fall within the prohibition of making 
available under Article 15 para. 2 of the Ordinance?
All activities which involve, directly or indirectly, the payment of commissions to the NSD or the 
provision of other funds or economic resources to it or for its benefit fall within the prohibition on 
making available under Article 15 para. 2 of the Ordinance and are prohibited. It is therefore not 
permitted to sell Russian securities held by the NSD and where the NSD directly or indirectly receives 
commissions.
2.6.3 For which operators can SECO grant an exemption in accordance with Article 15 
para. 5b c of the Ordinance?
With respect to the carrying out by the Russian Federation of compulsory transfers of ownership in or 
control over a legal person, organisation or body established in the Russian Federation that was 
previously owned by a legal person, organisation or body established in Switzerland, an EEA Member 
State or the United Kingdom, SECO may authorise the release of certain blocked assets or economic 
resources or that certain assets or economic resources be provided to a natural or legal person, 
organisation or body in accordance with Article 15 paragraph 1 of the Ordinance. This possibility of 
authorisation is applicable only to operators who have been included in Annex I to Regulation (EU) 
269/2014 on the basis of the criterion of inclusion in the list specified in Article 3(1)(j) of that Regulation.
2.6.4 Pursuant to Article 15 para. 8c of the Ordinance, SECO may grant an exceptional 
authorisation for the provision of the NSD in connection with the sale of Russian securities, 
provided that the conditions of Article 15 para. 8c letters a-e of the Ordinance are met. May a 
bank in Switzerland disclose the identity of end-investors to a Russian trustee, custodian or 
manager in order to have dividends from Russian shares or depositary receipts credited to 
an omnibus or individual account in Russia? Can a bank in Switzerland assist its clients in 
opening an omnibus or individual account in Russia?
The disclosure of client data is not covered by the Ordinance, provided that other requirements (in 
particular banking secrecy) are met. A Swiss bank may assist its clients in opening accounts with 
Russian banks, provided it is not a bank subject to the provisions of Article 15 (freezing of assets and 
economic resources) or Article 24a (prohibition of transactions with state-owned enterprises).
2.6.5 Can a bank in Switzerland accept payments from such omnibus or individual accounts?
Yes, payments of incoming dividends from issuing institutions subject to Article 15 (freezing of assets 
and economic resources) or Article 24a (prohibition of transactions with state-owned enterprises) of the 
Ordinance should only be blocked or rejected if the payment is made directly by the sanctioned issuing 
institution (see previous answer). Payments from omnibus or individual accounts with non-sanctioned 
Russian banks can be accepted.
2.6.6 Does the notification obligation in Article 16 para. 1a apply to all existing entries in 
Annex 8?
Pursuant to Article 16 para. 1bis of the Ordinance, natural persons and institutions that hold or 
administer assets or have knowledge of economic resources owned or under the control of natural 
persons, companies or organisations listed i n  Schedule 8 must notify
16/26
without delay to SECO all transactions carried out in the two weeks prior to the inclusion of such 
persons, companies or organisations in Appendix 8. The duty of notification applies both to existing 
entries in Appendix 8 of the Ordinance and to all future entries in Appendix 8.
The reporting obligation covers information on any movement, transfer, alteration, use, access or 
manipulation of assets of the natural persons, undertakings or organisations listed in Schedule 8 of the 
Ordinance in the two weeks preceding the sanction. It is assumed that this information is already 
available, usually in existing registers and documents. There is no obligation to conduct further 
investigations, apart from checking existing registers and documents.
The relevant notifications to SECO are made exclusively via the transaction table, which can be 
obtained from SECO upon request by e-mail (sanctions@seco.admin.ch), and transmitted 
electronically, preferably via the FDJP-certified PrivaSphere Secure Messaging or by file transfer.
For entries in Annex 8 made before 1 December 2023, the deadline for the notification obligation is 29 
March 2024.
2.7 Prohibition on accepting deposits and assets based on 
cryptocurrencies and related reporting obligations (Art. 20 and 21)
Who are Articles 20 and 21 addressed to?
2.7.1 Are the provisions also applicable to all banks under the Banking Act?
Switzerland has joined the EU sanctions against Russia. Council Regulation (EU) 2022/328 of 25 
February 2022 stipulates that all credit institutions are subject to the corresponding measure. 
Accordingly, the provisions of Articles 20 and 21 of the Ordinance also apply to all persons and 
organisations that accept deposits and grant credits on a professional basis, such as banks under the 
Banking Act.
2.7.2 Are insurance companies subject to Articles 20 and 21 of the Ordinance?
In principle, insurance does not fall under Articles 20 and 21 of the Ordinance. Exceptions are deposits 
with a bank as part of a life insurance policy as well as deposits in pillar 3a accounts. If the beneficial 
owner falls under Article 20 para. 1 of the Ordinance, such deposits are subject to the provisions of 
Articles 20 and 21.
How should declarations be made according to Article 21?
2.7.3 Does the exemption in Article 20 para. 3 for Swiss nationals, nationals of an EEA Member 
State and natural persons holding a temporary or permanent residence permit from 
Switzerland or an EEA Member State also apply in the context of the obligation to declare 
under Article 21 of the Ordinance?
Yes. The duty to declare under Article 21 of the Ordinance applies only to business relationships that 
fall under Article 20 para. 1 and 2 of the Ordinance. If the exemption in Article 20 para. 3 applies to a 
business relationship, the latter does not have to be declared either.
17/26
2.7.4 What information must parties subject to the Act provide to SECO in implementation of 
the duty to declare pursuant to Article 21 of the Ordinance? Is the same information 
required as for notifications according to Article 16 of the Ordinance?
Reporting according to Article 21 of the Ordinance must be distinguished from reporting on blocked 
assets according to Article 16 of the Ordinance. Existing deposits exceeding CHF 100,000 must be 
reported to SECO in aggregate form (i.e. both the number of business relationships and the sum of 
current balances.
2.7.5 In what format should the declaration be made? Is there a form?
The notification must be made exclusively electronically, e.g. via Privasphere or by means of a file 
transfer to the e-mail address sanctions@seco.admin.ch. For this purpose, a standard form (Excel) is 
available on the SECO website.
How is the CHF 100,000 limit calculated?
2.7.6 Does the acceptance of 'corporate actions' (dividends, coupons, etc.) fall under 
Article 20 of the Ordinance?
No. Corporate actions (dividends, coupons, etc.) in connection with securities deposited in 
corresponding business relationships may be accepted even if the limit of CHF 100,000 per person or 
organisation is exceeded.
2.7.7 Does interest on deposits fall under Article 20 of the Ordinance?
No. Interest on existing deposits held by the bank prior to the entry into force of the Ordinance is not 
considered a new deposit under Article 20 para. 1 and may therefore be credited even if the limit of 
CHF 100,000 per person or organisation is exceeded.
2.7.8 Do securities and their custody fall under Article 20 of the Ordinance? Can the proceeds 
from the sale of securities booked in the corresponding customer relationship be accepted 
even if the limit of CHF 100,000 is exceeded?
Deposit and safekeeping of securities do not fall within the definition of "deposits" according to Article 
20 of the Ordinance. Proceeds from the sale of securities deposited in the corresponding business 
relationship may be accepted even if the limit of CHF 100,000 per person or organisation is exceeded.
2.7.9 Do refunds or payments from state bodies (taxes, contributions from compensation 
funds, etc.) or pension funds fall under Article 20 of the Ordinance? Can such 
payments be accepted even if they exceed the CHF 100,000 limit?
Acceptance of refunds or payments by state bodies (e.g. tax authorities, compensation funds) or by 
pension funds does not fall within the definition of 'deposits' under Article 20 of the Ordinance. Such 
repayments or payments may be accepted even if they exceed the limit of CHF 100,000 per person or 
body. The prohibition also does not apply to the receipt of pension assets by the pension fund (vested 
benefits) that are booked in vested benefit accounts.
2.7.10 Can payments used to repay loans be accepted even if they exceed the CHF 100,000 
limit?
Yes. Deposits that are immediately debited for the repayment of outstanding loans do not fall within the 
definition of 'deposits' under Article 20 of the Ordinance. Consequently, such payments may be 
accepted even if they exceed the limit of CHF 100,000 per person or organisation.
18/26
2.7.11 Does the CHF 100,000 limit only apply to new deposits? Or does it apply to the total amount 
of deposits?
The limit of CHF 100,000 per person or organisation refers to the total amount of deposits per 
customer with the respective bank or institution. For example, if a customer has existing deposits of 
CHF 80 000, a maximum of CHF 20 000 in deposits can still be accepted. If, on the other hand, he has 
existing deposits of CHF 110,000, no further deposits can be accepted.
2.7.12 How does the limit of CHF 100,000 apply to natural persons who are the beneficial owners 
of (more than) one legal entity with which a bank has a business relationship and who may 
possibly have a private account?
The limit of CHF 100,000 applies to each legal entity. If the beneficial owner of several legal entities 
has its own account with the same bank, the limit is calculated separately. If it has two or more 
accounts in its own name, the total of its assets is calculated instead (analogous to the accounts of the 
same legal entity). This sum may not exceed the limit o f  CHF 100,000.
2.7.13 Do negative account balances have to be notified?
No.
Which natural persons are covered by Article 20 of the Ordinance?
2.7.14 Do Swiss-Russian dual nationals fall under the exemption according to Art. 20 para. 3 of the 
Ordinance? What about dual nationals of Russia and the EEA? What about dual nationals of 
Russia and a third country?
Do persons with a residence permit in Switzerland or the EEA fall under the exemption according to 
Article 20 para. 3 of the Ordinance?
According to Article 20 paragraph 3 of the Ordinance, the prohibitions in Article 20 paragraphs 1 and 2 
do not apply to Swiss nationals, nationals of an EEA Member State and natural persons holding a 
temporary or permanent residence permit issued by Switzerland or an EEA Member State. It follows 
that dual Swiss-Russian nationals and persons holding both Russian and EEA Member State 
nationality are not affected by the prohibition in Article 20 of the Ordinance. On the other hand, persons 
holding both Russian nationality and the nationality of another third country outside the EEA are 
affected by the prohibition in Article 20.
2.7.15 Do persons who hold Monegasque, Andorran or British nationality or who hold a residence 
permit in the Principality of Monaco, the Principality of Andorra or the United Kingdom fall 
within the exception provided for in Article 20(3) of the Ordinance?
Monegasque, Andorran and United Kingdom nationals and natural persons holding a temporary or 
permanent residence permit issued by the Principality of Monaco, the Principality of Andorra or the 
United Kingdom shall not be subject to the prohibition referred to in Article 20.
2.7.16 Does a person of Russian nationality who is awaiting the renewal or extension of a 
residence permit no longer fall under the exemption in Article 20 paragraph 3?
If the person of Russian nationality can prove that he/she has submitted a timely application for 
renewal or extension of his/her residence permit to the migration authorities in Switzerland, an EEA 
Member State, the United Kingdom, Monaco, Andorra, a
19/26
Gibraltar, the Isle of Man or the Channel Islands, and that the process is still ongoing by the authorities, 
continues to fall under the exemption.
It is the bank's responsibility to regularly check whether customers meet the requirements and to 
ensure compliance with the ordinance.
2.7.17 Are accounts held jointly with a Russian person subject to the prohibitions of 
Article 20 of the Ordinance?
If a Russian person holds an account jointly with a person from a third country, the account is subject to 
the prohibitions of Article 20 of the Ordinance. However, if the account is held jointly with a person 
falling within the scope of the exemption under Article 20 para. 3 (see previous question), the 
prohibitions do not apply.
2.7.18 Do Russian consular and diplomatic representations in Switzerland fall under Article 
20 of the Ordinance?
No. Consular and diplomatic representations of the Russian Federation in Switzerland are not 
subject to the prohibition because, according to Article 20 paragraph 1 of the Ordinance, they 
are not
"organisations established in the Russian Federation" nor of "organisations established outside 
Switzerland". Therefore, these institutions may accept deposits despite the restrictions in this 
article.
Which legal persons are covered by Article 20 of the Ordinance?
2.7.19 Do trusts with a Russian person as trustor or beneficiary fall under Article 20 of 
the Ordinance?
No, trusts with a Russian person as trustor or beneficiary do not fall under Article 20 of the Ordinance.
2.7.20 Does a company established outside Switzerland or the EEA in which a Russian person 
or a person resident in the Russian Federation is a majority shareholder fall under Article 
20 of the Ordinance?
Yes, pursuant to Article 20(1)(d) of the Ordinance, the accounts of operating companies established 
outside Switzerland and the EEA in which a Russian national or a natural person resident in the 
Russian Federation owns - directly or indirectly - more than 50 per cent of the ownership rights fall 
within the scope of Article 20 of the Ordinance.
On the other hand, the prohibitions in Article 20 para. 1 of the Ordinance do not apply to banks, 
companies or organisations established outside Switzerland and the EEA and whose ownership rights 
are directly or indirectly held by more than 50 per cent by Russian citizens or natural persons residing 
in the Russian Federation who hold Swiss citizenship or citizenship of an EEA country, or hold a Swiss 
residence permit or a residence permit of an EEA country.
20/26
2.7.21 Do funds domiciled outside Switzerland or the EEA that are equivalent to an organisation 
and in which a Russian citizen or natural person resident in the Russian Federation holds 
more than 50 per cent of the ownership rights (or an equivalent shareholding as an investor) 
fall under Article 20 of the Ordinance?
Yes, they fall under Article 20 para. 1 letter d of the Ordinance. In addition, according to Article 23, it is 
prohibited to sell units in collective funds offering exposure to securities denominated in Swiss francs or 
in the official currency of an EU member state, to Russian citizens or natural persons resident in the 
Russian Federation or to banks, companies or organisations established in the Russian Federation.
Do Russian consular and diplomatic representations in Switzerland fall under Article 20 of the 
Ordinance?
No. Consular and diplomatic representations of the Russian Federation in Switzerland are not subject 
to the prohibition as, according to Article 20 paragraph 1 of the Ordinance, they are neither 
'organisations established in the Russian Federation' nor 'organisations established outside 
Switzerland'. Therefore, these institutions can accept deposits despite the restrictions in this article.
Other questions
2.7.22 Can people with Russian citizenship withdraw deposits?
Article 20 of the ordinance prohibits the acceptance of new deposits if the total value of deposits 
exceeds CHF 100,000. Existing deposits - regardless of their current amount - may be freely used and 
also withdrawn.
2.7.23 Can transfers be made within a bank even if this means that the credit account exceeds 
the CHF 100,000 limit?
It is possible to make internal transfers within a bank between different accounts of the same Russian person.
2.7.24 Do accounts that do not belong to a Russian person but which a Russian person has the 
right to dispose of fall under Article 20 of the Ordinance?
No. As long as the Russian person does not own the account but only manages it, Article 20 of the 
Ordinance does not apply.
2.7.25 Do the deposits required for non-prohibited cross-border trade in goods and services 
between Switzerland and the Russian Federation, between Switzerland and the EEA and 
between the EEA and the Russian Federation fall within the prohibitions of Article 20 
paragraphs 1 and 2?
Yes, as of 31 August 2022 such deposits fall under the above-mentioned bans. However, by virtue of 
Article 20 paragraph 4 letter f of the Ordinance, they may be subject to an exemption issued by SECO 
in agreement with the competent departments of the FDFA and the FDF.
2.7.26 How should service providers deal with the existing cryptocurrency wallets or 
cryptocurrency accounts of Russian citizens or natural and legal persons or organisations 
established in the Russian Federation?
Article 20 paragraph 2 of the Ordinance prohibits the provision of services in connection with 
cryptocurrency wallets, cryptocurrency accounts or custody of cryptocurrency-based assets. Therefore, 
such services may no longer be provided and existing accounts or portfolios must be closed. The 
freezing of cryptocurrency-based assets is not sufficient. Existing assets must be returned to Russian 
clients or they can be converted into a fiat currency or other assets not subject to
21/26
sanctions. The storage restrictions in Article 20 para. 1 of the Ordinance must be complied with.
2.8 Prohibition of central depositories from providing certain services (Art. 22)
2.8.1 Are new securities issued as part of a stock split or stock split on the basis of existing 
securities subject to the prohibitions of Article 22 para. 1?
No. New securities issued as part of a stock split or stock split on the basis of existing securities are not 
subject to the prohibitions of Article 22 para. 1. This interpretation of Article 22 para. 1 applies by 
analogy to Article 23 para. 1.
2.9 Prohibition to sell securities (Art. 23)
2.9.1 Are the securities of a company currently traded on a stock exchange (issued before 12 
April) subject to the prohibitions of Article 23 if the company has issued new securities after 
12 April? Or are only newly issued securities after 12 April (e.g. a new bond tranche with its 
own ISIN number) affected?
Even 'old' securities that are still valid fall under Article 23 because it is usually impossible to 
distinguish them from those issued after 12 April. On the contrary, in the case of the creation of a new 
ISIN number the matter is assessed differently because a distinction can be made. Furthermore, 
shares that are already on deposit should not be sold. In principle, it is forbidden to sell new securities, 
i.e. issued after 12 April 2022.
This interpretation of Article 23 applies by analogy to sectoral sanctions, such as Article 18 of the 
Ordinance.
2.9.2 Are securities derivatives (e.g. total return swaps) that allow a client a synthetic exposure to 
a security without physical delivery of the security also affected by the ban?
Since the ordinance explicitly speaks of fund shares, such a transaction with the person concerned 
would be considered a circumvention transaction and would therefore be subject to the prohibition.
2.9.3 Are fund units within a depository subject to the prohibition of Article 23 if new securities 
are added to the fund in the event of an underlying?
These fund shares may be maintained provided they are not sold. The 'retention' of existing fund units 
is not subject to the prohibition of Article 23.
2.9.4 Do persons who hold Monegasque, Andorran or British nationality or who hold a residence 
permit in the Principality of Monaco, the Principality of Andorra or the United Kingdom fall 
within the exception provided for in Article 23, paragraph 2 of the Ordinance?
Monegasque, Andorran or United Kingdom nationals and natural persons holding a temporary or 
permanent residence permit issued by the Principality of Monaco, the Principality of Andorra or the 
United Kingdom shall not be subject to the prohibition laid down in Article 23.
22/26
2.9.5 Can capital requests for private equity investments in which the commitment was made 
before 12 April 2022 also be fulfilled after that date?
Yes, because the investment was made irrevocably at the time the financial commitment was made 
('commitment'). Subsequent capital calls are therefore not a new investment.
2.10 Prohibition of transactions with the Central Bank of the Russian 
Federation (Art. 24)
2.10.1 How must the notifications on reserves and assets be drawn up in accordance with 
Article 24 para. 3?
Notifications are made via a special form, made available by SECO (sanctions@seco.admin.ch).
2.11 Prohibitions on Energy and Mining Enterprises in the Russian 
Federation (Art. 28b)
2.11.1 Can ADRs (American Depository Receipts) of Russian companies be exchanged for the 
corresponding shares?
Yes, the exchange of ADRs for shares concerns existing participations or existing equity. In this sense, 
the exchange does not fall under the prohibitions of Article 28b of the Ordinance.
The exchange of ADRs for shares does not make economic resources available, directly or indirectly, 
to the Russian companies concerned. The exchange of ADRs in a company sanctioned under Article 
15 of the Ordinance is therefore not to be regarded as a prohibited provision within the meaning of 
Article 15 para. 2 of the Ordinance.
2.11.2 Does the acquisition of existing shares fall within the prohibitions of Article 28b of the Ordinance?
Yes. Article 28b prohibits the acquisition of new shareholdings or the increase of shareholdings in any 
legal person, company or organisation established or registered under the law of a state outside 
Switzerland or the EEA and operating in the energy or mining sector in the Russian Federation; 
therefore, it is no longer possible to acquire shares in such companies, regardless of when they were 
issued.
2.11.3 Does the acquisition of existing bonds fall within the prohibitions of Article 28b of the Ordinance?
No. Article 28b prohibits the provision of or participation in new loans, credits or other financial 
resources, including equity capital, to or for the purpose of financing legal persons, companies or 
organisations incorporated or registered under the laws of a State outside Switzerland and the EEA 
and active in the energy sector in the Russian Federation. Therefore, participation in new financing 
involving an inflow of funds (debt or equity financing) falls under the prohibition.
2.11.4 Is it allowed to invest in a fund that contains securities of companies active in the Russian 
energy and mining sectors?
Yes, Article 28b aims to prevent new investments in Russian energy and mining projects. Portfolio 
investments (participation of less than 10 per cent) within a fund are not covered by this prohibition.
23/26
2.12 Prohibitions concerning trusts (Art. 28d)
Which legal institutions are affected by Article 28d?
2.12.1 How is the concept of 'neighbouring legal institution' mentioned in Article 28d 
para. 1 of the Ordinance to be interpreted?
Legal institutions are to be regarded as related when they have a structure or function similar to that of 
a trust, such as the creation of a fiduciary relationship between the trustee and the beneficiary or the 
separation or splitting of the legal and economic ownership of assets.
2.12.2 Do foundations fall under the term 'related legal institution'?
Foundations within the meaning of Art. 80 ff. CC - or the corresponding foreign provisions - are 
deemed to be a 'similar legal institution' under Article 28d of the Ordinance. Foundations domiciled in 
Switzerland or an EEA member state that pursue non-profit objectives and are subject to supervision, 
as well as religious foundations domiciled in Switzerland or an EEA member state are exempt.
2.12.3 Does Section 28d of the Ordinance also apply to existing trusts or only to new ones?
Article 28d applies to all structures designated as trusts or similar legal arrangements. It is irrelevant 
whether such structures were set up before or after the entry into force of the Article.
2.12.4 What rules apply to specific forms such as discretionary trusts?
The provisions are the same: if the trustor or the beneficiary of the trust is subject to the prohibition, the 
latter applies in any event, regardless of the form of the trust.
In the case of a discretionary trust in which the beneficiary subject to the provision is replaced by a 
person who is not subject to the provision, the previously prohibited trust would again be permitted, 
provided that the trustor is not himself subject to the prohibition.
2.12.5 Article 28d para. 27 of the Ordinance speaks of 'trustee, nominee shareholder, 
administrator, general secretary or similar function'. What is meant by all these 
descriptions? ?
Article 28d para. 2 lists a number of functions that may be equated with that of trustee. If a person acts 
as trustee, i.e. receives instructions from a trustor for the purpose of managing assets on behalf of a 
beneficiary, that person is treated as a trustee, irrespective of the name of his or her function.
2.12.6 What services are covered by the prohibition? Does this definition include the provision 
of bank accounts, securities and payment transactions or similar services for a trust?
It is prohibited to provide a trust or a related legal institution with management services, including 
accounting services, which fall under the prohibited direct provision of management services to a trust.
On the other hand, the most common banking and payment services, such as the provision of a bank 
account, the execution of payments or currency exchange services, are not prohibited because they 
are not 'management services' according to Article 28d para. 1 of the Ordinance.
24/26
What is meant by control?
2.12.7 Article 28d para. 1 letter d of the Ordinance mentions the concept of
'control'. What is meant by this term?
As in Articles 15 and 20 of the Ordinance, the concept of control must be assessed on a case-by-case 
basis. To do so, it is decisive to determine whether a legal person, an enterprise or an organisation is 
under the actual control of one of the persons listed under a-c (see the question "How is the concept of 
'control' over an enterprise or organisation to be interpreted?" in Chapter 1 of this document).
What territorial scope is envisaged?
2.12.8 What reference to Switzerland is necessary for Article 28d of the Ordinance to apply? Are 
criteria such as the legal form of the trust, the registered office or domicile of the trustee, 
protectors, beneficiaries and the location of the assets relevant?
All natural and legal persons established in Switzerland are obliged to comply with the Ordinance, 
regardless of the registered office of the trust and the parties involved. Therefore, the other criteria are 
not relevant.
2.12.9 Does the term "providing a place of business" (Art. 28d para. 1) also cover cases where 
the trustee's actual management (abroad) and statutory seat (in Switzerland) are 
different? What is meant by "providing a business or administrative address"?
Yes, "providing a place of business" means making an address in Switzerland available to the trust. 
"Providing a business or administrative address", on the other hand, means making available an 
address in Switzerland that is directly attributable to the trust or can be associated with the trust.
2.12.10 Does Article 28d of the Ordinance apply to companies established in Switzerland belonging 
to a trust with a Russian trustor or beneficiary? Can a Swiss stock corporation take care of 
the accounts for a foreign company that is indirectly (i.e. through a holding company in the 
trust structure) wholly owned by a trust within the meaning of Article 28d para. 1?
Article 28d of the Ordinance applies to trusts and related legal institutions while it excludes legal 
persons owned by a trust or related legal institution under Article 28d. However, undertakings owned 
by a trust or legal institution may not provide management services to the trust.
2.12.11 Is there a reference to Russia if in the past the structure was founded by Russian persons 
within the meaning of Article 28d para. 1 but they no longer have any influence (e.g. as 
deceased) and there are no Russian citizens among the beneficiaries?
No. The reference to Russia exists only if a Russian national is currently acting as trustor or beneficiary 
of the trust or other legal institution concerned.
2.12.12 If a trust has several beneficiaries and one of them is affected by the prohibition in Article 
28d, does the trust fall within the scope of the Ordinance?
Yes, it is sufficient for only one person referred to in Article 28d para. 1 to be subject to the Ordinance 
for the provisions of Article 28d to apply.
Example: If there are five non-Russian citizens in a trust and one Russian citizen acting as beneficiary, 
the trust is subject to the provisions of Article 28d of the Ordinance.
25/26
How does the derogation in Article 28d para. 3 apply?
2.12.13 For the exception to apply, is it necessary that all 'beneficiaries' or all 'trustors' fulfil the 
conditions of Article 28d para. 3 or is it sufficient that only one or a majority of the 
beneficiaries fulfil these conditions?
Similarly to Article 28d para. 1, the trust or similar legal arrangement is subject to the exception in 
Article 28d para. 3 if even only one of the beneficiaries falls into the categories described.
Example: If a trust has five beneficiaries of which four have only Russian citizenship and one has dual 
citizenship of Russia and an EEA member state, the exception applies.
2.12.14 Does the exception in Article 28d para. 3 of the Ordinance apply if the trustor with Russian 
nationality holds a temporary or permanent residence permit issued by an EEA member state 
or Switzerland but his actual domicile is outside this state?
Yes. The relevant factors are citizenship and/or residence permit, not the location of the trustor. In this 
case the trust or related legal institution is subject to the exemption because the trustor holds a 
temporary or permanent residence permit issued by Switzerland or an EEA member state.
2.12.15 Do persons who hold Monegasque, Andorran or British nationality or who hold a residence 
permit in the Principality of Monaco, the Principality of Andorra or the United Kingdom fall 
within the exemption provided for in Article 28d(3) of the Ordinance?
Monegasque, Andorran and British nationals and natural persons holding a temporary or permanent 
residence permit issued by the Principality of Monaco, the Principality of Andorra or the United 
Kingdom are covered by the exemption provided for in Article 28d.
Is there a transitional period? If so, how is it regulated?
According to Article 35 para. 18, all Swiss natural and legal persons providing a registered office, 
business or administrative address and management services to a trust have a transitional period to 
fulfil the requirements of the Ordinance, which expires on 31 July 2022.
2.12.16 What happens if it is not possible to terminate within the transitional period a contract 
concerning the provision of a service prohibited under Article 28d of the Ordinance?
The prohibition on acting, or arranging for another person to act, as trustee, nominee shareholder, 
administrator, secretary-general or in a similar capacity, for a trust or similar legal arrangement came 
into force again on 1 August 2022 (the corresponding provision in Art. 28d para. 2 was previously 
temporarily repealed). Pursuant to Section 28d para. 5 lit. a (which entered into force on 1 August 
2022), SECO may authorise exemptions from the prohibition in Section 28d para. 2 in order to permit 
the continuation of services to carry out transactions necessary to terminate contracts entered into prior 
to 28 April 2022 that are incompatible with Section 28d of the Ordinance, provided that such 
transactions have been commenced prior to 30 May 2022 and concluded by 1 October 2022.
26/26
2.13 Prohibitions concerning services (Art. 28e)
2.13.1 Does the exemption in Article 28e para. 2 lit. a apply to legal persons, undertakings or 
organisations established in Russia that are indirectly owned or controlled, exclusively or 
jointly, by legal persons, undertakings or organisations incorporated or registered under 
Swiss law, the law of an EEA Member State or the law of a partner?
The exemption under Article 28e para. 2 lit. a shall apply where the provision of services is intended for 
the exclusive use by legal persons, companies or organisations established in Russia which are 
ultimately owned or controlled by a legal person, company or organisation of the EEA, Switzerland or a 
partner referred to in Article 1 lit. f.
Accordingly, the exemption in Article 28e para. 2 letter a applies where, for example, the Russian 
organisation using the services is owned by an organisation which is not established in Russia, an EEA 
Member State, Switzerland or one of its Article 1 letter f partners, but is ultimately owned or controlled 
by an enterprise of an EEA Member State, Switzerland or one of its Article 1 letter f partners.
The exemption in Article 28e para. 2 lit. a, on the other hand, does not apply if, for example, the 
Russian organisation using the services is owned or controlled by a company in the EEA, Switzerland 
or a partner of Switzerland referred to in Article 1 lit. f and that company is in turn owned or controlled 
by a Russian company or a company of another jurisdiction (outside the EEA, Switzerland or a partner 
of Switzerland referred to in Article 1 lit. f).
2.13.2 In agreement with the competent departments of the FDFA and the FDFA and pursuant to 
Article 28e para. 3, SECO may authorise exceptions to the prohibitions in Article 28e para. 
1d?
Yes, SECO may authorise derogations from the prohibitions in Article 28e para. 1d, if this is necessary 
for one of the purposes referred to in Article 28e para. 3.
2.13.3 Does the exemption in Article 28e para. 2 lit. a also apply to the provision of services of all 
kinds according to Article 28e para. 1d?
Yes, the exemption also applies to the provision of services in connection with the services or software 
referred to in subparagraph 1-1c or in connection with the sale, export, transit, transportation or making 
available of such services or software to or for use in the Russian Federation, provided that the 
conditions of Article 28e(2)(a) or (b) are met.
2.13.4 In what format must notifications according to Article 28e para. 6 in conjunction with para. 7 
be drafted? Is there a special form?
Notifications are made exclusively electronically, e.g. via Privasphere or by means of a file transfer to 
the e-mail address sanctions@seco.admin.ch. For this purpose, a standard form (Excel) is available on 
the SECO website.